---
master_file: "[[@CONJUNCTIONSJUPITERSATURNpdf]]"
---
# Index for CONJUNCTIONS OF JUPITER AND SATURN.pdf

172 JRASC August/October / août/octobre 2000
F
or a very long time, people have wondered about the nature of our universe. Some ancient Greeks believed that the stars were part of an invisible sphere located not far beyond the outer planets, and that comprised all there was. Since the time of Galileo astronomy has continually revealed new aspects of the universe, to the extent that we now know that we live in the outer reaches of an ordinary galaxy at no special point in space. But the underlying nature of the universe itself has puzzled cosmologists for most of a century. Now, Paolo de Bernardis of the University of Rome, and David Wittman of Bell Labs, along with their collaborators, have determined two of the most important properties of the universe: the total density of matter and energy, and the fraction of the total amount that is matter (see 27 April and 11 May issues of Nature). De Bernardis finds that the universe has the “critical density” that makes it “flat,” and Wittman estimates that the contribution of matter — including dark matter — to the total is about thirty percent. The other seventy percent is energy. The universe has some interesting properties, starting with the observation that the sky is dark at night. You might think that has little to do with the rest of the universe, but in fact if it were infinitely old, the entire sky would shine with the brightness of the surface of an average star. That is because, in an infinitely old universe, every single line of sight would eventually end at the surface of a star. So, darkness has always been a strong indicator that the universe had a beginning. The discovery of the 3 K cosmic microwave background radiation by Penzias and Wilson settled the issue; that background is the remnant of the cooling expanding fireball in which space itself was created. The background is not completely uniform,
though. The COBE satellite discovered tiny fluctuations in its temperature in 1992. Those fluctuations were so far apart on the sky, however, that they were physically unrelated to one another. One of the “holy grails” of cosmology has been to measure the fluctuations at sufficient resolution that the regions were physically connected when the universe was very young, and that is what de Bernardis has done. A second experiment (headed by Paul Richards of Berkeley) has since confirmed the results of de Bernardis (they will appear in an upcoming issue of the Astrophysical Journal Letters).
Before the universe had cooled sufficiently for electrons to combine with protons to form hydrogen, light could not travel very far before it was absorbed by an electron or proton. The universe at that time consisted of something like thick matter-light soup that had compression waves, which are like sound waves in air, sloshing around in it. Regions of higher density would contract under
gravity until the pressure of photons pushed the gas back. The tiny fluctuations in the microwave background are the signatures of those waves. Where the gas was compressed, it was hotter, and when it expanded, it cooled, giving rise to the temperature variations in the background radiation. Just like waves in air and water have characteristics determined by properties such as the mass density of the medium in which the wave travels, so too were the compression waves influenced by the density of the matterlight soup. Therefore, the angular scale over which temperature variations are correlated with each other is a probe of the total mass-energy density of the universe. De Bernardis found that the fluctuations are essentially exactly as predicted for a universe with the critical mass-energy density, in other words, a “flat” universe. The concept of a flat universe is both easy and complex to explain. Easy, in that
Second Light
Weighing the Universe
by Leslie J. Sage (l.sage@naturedc.com)
“Now, Paolo de Bernardis of the
University of Rome, and David
Wittman of Bell Labs, along with
their collaborators, have determined
two of the most important properties
of the universe: the total density of
matter and energy, and the fraction
of the total amount that is matter.”



August/October / août/octobre 2000 JRASC 173
flat means topologically flat, but difficult because it is hard for us to imagine what that really means. In physical terms, one consequence is that the sum of the interior angles of a triangle will always equal 180 degrees. Another consequence is that if a starship (say, the Voyager) flew in a straight line forever, it would never end up where it began. That is not necessarily true in a curved universe. Imagine a person walking over the surface of the Earth, which we will use as an example of positively curved space. While walking, the person sees flat land, and a flat horizon, and so could be forgiven for thinking that they are in a “flat universe.” If the person walks long enough in a straight line, however, they will end up back where they started. Another person in orbit about the Earth would consider ending up in the same place simply as a consequence of the Earth being a sphere — there is nothing mysterious about it — but to the walker it would seem very strange. We have a hard time imagining what a curved universe would be like, because we cannot easily picture a four-dimensional space from which to look back on our threedimensional universe and see the simplicity of the curved path we would follow. Fortunately, we do not have to worry about it, because we live in a flat universe. The second part of the story is tracking down how much of the massenergy density is actually in the form of mass. It has been well known for quite a long time that if you add up all of the mass observed in stars and galaxies, including very cold molecular gas, cool atomic hydrogen, and hot X-ray emitting plasma, then at best you get something like three percent of the critical density. That, along with problems involving how fast galaxies rotate and how they can remain bound in clusters, led to the theoretical proposal that most of the mass
of the universe is in some exotic form, nebulously referred to as “dark matter.” Over the last twenty years, a particular variant called “standard cold dark matter” has been elevated to the status of a religion among some theoretical cosmologists, despite ever-increasing amounts of evidence that it simply cannot explain the observations. Often, the tests were sufficiently imprecise, or the theoretical predictions sufficiently fraught with uncertainties, that the theoreticians had enough wiggle room to save their dark matter. As a result of measurements done by Wittman and three other groups whose results have not yet been published (led respectively by van Waerbeke, Bacon, and Kaiser), however, we know that is no longer true. We tend to think of light moving in straight lines — indeed, lasers are used to dig straight tunnels — but light paths curve around very massive bodies. That is a straightforward prediction of general relativity, and was confirmed in 1919 by Eddington. It means that masses can act like lenses; a number of gravitationallylensed quasars and distant galaxies have been discovered. The weak gravitational lensing observed by Wittman is a bit different. Instead of producing multiple images of galaxies, slight distortions are induced in their shapes. As the light from distant galaxies that lie close together in the sky, but are physically unrelated, travels past clusters of galaxies, the shapes of the distant galaxies are distorted in the same way. Measuring the amount of correlated distortion is a sensitive way to probe the mass density along the line of sight. Because dark matter does have mass, it will be detected in the same way. Although the project is easy to describe in principle, it is horribly difficult to accomplish in reality. Previous attempts failed. With four independent groups
reaching essentially the same result, however, it seems that this time the result is dependable. There is only enough mass — even including the dark matter — to provide 30 percent of the critical density. That means that the remaining 70 percent, which is needed to explain the result of de Bernardis, must be in the form of energy density: the name given to such energy density is the “cosmological constant.” We do not understand this property of the Universe, but its observable effect is to accelerate expansion over time, acting like anti-gravity. Instead of the expansion of the universe slowing down with time, as a ball thrown in the air slows as it reaches its highest point, it is speeding up. That means that the Hubble constant — the rate of expansion at this time is not a constant: it was lower in the past than it is today. One beneficial effect of the cosmological constant is to reduce the discrepancy between the age of the universe as inferred from the Hubble constant and the ages of the oldest stars in our Galaxy. The first hints of a cosmological constant were seen two years ago in systematic effects in the apparent brightness of supernovae in distant galaxies (see 1 January 1998 issue of Nature).
Not only does our universe contain lots of matter that we cannot see directly, now we know that some of its properties are dominated by an energy density that is even more mysterious.
Dr. Leslie J. Sage is Senior Editor, Physical Sciences, for Nature Magazine and a Research Associate in the Astronomy Department at the University of Maryland. He grew up in Burlington, Ontario, where even the bright lights of Toronto did not dim his enthusiasm for astronomy. Currently he studies molecular gas and star formation in galaxies, particularly interacting ones.



174 August/October / août/octobre 2000
Research Papers Articles de recherche
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, 94: 174—178, 2000 Aug./Oct.
CONJUNCTIONS OF JUPITER AND SATURN
by Donald V. Etz
Dayton, Ohio Electronic Mail: donetzday@worldnet.att.net
(Received March 28, 2000; revised July 4, 2000)
Abstract. This year’s Jupiter-Saturn conjunction is an astronomical event that has been noted in yearbooks, even though it occurred too close to the Sun to be readily visible. Astronomical conjunctions are often loosely defined. Four questions need to be answered: Which two astronomical bodies are involved? What co-ordinate system is used to define the conjunction? From what astronomical body is the event observed? Is the event described apparent or real? Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions are among the most impressive such events, occurring about every 20 years and involving the two outermost visible planets. The timing of apparent retrograde motion of the two planets can also produce an apparent triple conjunction, as happened in 1980-81. Triple conjunctions occur at irregular multiples of the conjunction interval. Occasionally a close grouping of Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars is also referred to as a triple conjunction. Successive Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions, slightly more than 240° apart, develop an interesting pattern as they step around the ecliptic, a rotating triangle with legs about 120° apart. In relation to the fixed stars, it takes about 854 or 913 years for the event to return to a point near the start of the sequence. Some scholars have given it as 960 years. Relative to a precessing co-ordinate system, it takes about 800 (794) years. Medieval scholars in Europe and the Near East were impressed by the above conjunction sequence, and tried to relate it to major events in world history. The earliest known attempts come from 8th century Baghdad, but their explanation may have originated in Iran (3rd to 7th centuries). It persisted in Europe into the 17th century.
Résumé. La conjonction de Jupiter et de Saturne cette année est un évènement astronomique qui a été signalé dans les annuaires, en dépis du fait qu’elle a eu lieu trop près du soleil pour pouvoir être facilement visible. Les conjonctions sont souvent définies qu’en grandes lignes. Pour ce faire, on doit répondre à quatre questions : Quels sont les deux objets célestes impliqués? Quel système de coordonnées utilise t-on? De quel objet observe t-on la conjonction? L’évènement est-il réel ou simplement apparent? La conjonction de Jupiter et de Saturne est parmi ces évènements les plus impressionnants, ayant lieu à peu près tous les 20 ans, et impliquant les deux planètes visibles les plus éloignées. La synchronisation du mouvement apparemment rétrograde des deux planètes peut à l’occasion produire une triple conjonction apparente, telle que s’est produite en 1980-1981. Les triples conjonctions ont lieu à des étapes multiples irrégulières de l’interval de la conjonction habituelle. De temps en temps, on parle de l’approche plutôt serrée de Jupiter, de Saturne et de Mars comme étant une triple conjonction. Les conjonctions successives de Jupiter et de Saturne, à un peu plus de 240° de séparation, présentent un aspect intéressant lors de leurs trajets le long de l’écliptic, soit un triangle tournant avec deux côtés faisant un angle de 120°. Par rapport aux étoiles fixes, environ 854 ou 913 années doivent s’écouler avant que la séquence reprenne plus ou moins au point de départ. Quelques savants maintiennent la durée du trajet aux 960 ans. Par rapport aux coordonnées avec calculs de précession, la durée est de quelques 800 (794) ans. Les savants médiévaux en Europe et au Moyen Orient avaient été très impressionnés par la séquence de cette conjonction et avaient essayé d’en faire le lien avec les évènements majeurs de l’histoire mondiale. Les plus anciennes tentatives de liens historiques connues remontent au 8e siècle à Baghdad, mais ces explications sont peut-être d’origine iranienne (3e au 7e siècle). Ces tentatives de liens persistèrent jusqu’au 17e siècle. SEM
1. Introduction
Among the astronomical events of the year 2000 was a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn. It was highlighted in popular astronomy periodicals, and emphasized in the Astronomical Almanac and Observer’s Handbook, even though it was too close to the Sun to be visible readily. It may be a good time to review planetary conjunctions in general, and Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions in particular. Several misunderstandings about such events are found in the current literature, and certain aspects of them are often overlooked. In addition, conjunctions of the outer visible planets were considered important omens by many people in medieval and early modern Europe and the Near East, and are therefore of interest to historians.
2. Conjunctions Defined
The Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac (Seidelmann 1992) defines an astronomical conjunction simply and clearly: “...the phenomenon in which two bodies have the same apparent celestial longitude ...or right ascension as viewed from a third body.” Variants of the definition are given in astronomical dictionaries and other reference works (Gribbin 1996; Ridpath & Woodruff 1996; Mitton 1993). Four important aspects of conjunctions are identified. First, the two astronomical bodies in conjunction may be any such bodies: Sun, Moon, planets, or stars. Only two kinds of conjunction are usually discussed, however: those involving a planet and the Sun, and those involving two planets. Some sources give preference to the



August/October / août/octobre 2000 JRASC 175
former, treating the latter almost as an afterthought. Second, the two bodies may be considered in conjunction according to two different co-ordinate systems: one (right ascension) based upon the equator of the body from which they are observed, and the other based upon an alternative reference plane such as the orbital plane of that body (celestial longitude). Some sources mention only one co-ordinate system. Astronomical software packages used for calculating conjunctions usually calculate them only in celestial longitude. (They actually calculate minimum separations, which are not necessarily exact conjunctions in longitude.) Third, the two bodies are considered to be in conjunction as viewed from a third body. The third body is usually assumed to be the Earth, the two co-ordinate systems being based on the Earth’s equator and the ecliptic. As the Explanatory Supplement definition continues, “Conjunctions are usually tabulated as geocentric phenomena.” But they can also be calculated as viewed from the Sun. The latter usually consider only the Earth’s orbit — the ecliptic — as the reference plane, identifying conjunctions in heliocentric ecliptic co-ordinates. It would probably be more logical, truly heliocentric, to use the Sun’s equator as the reference plane. Fourth, the two bodies are considered to be in conjunction when they have the same apparent longitude or right ascension. Because light has a finite velocity, astronomical bodies are never where we “see” them. They are therefore not in conjunction when they appear to be so. Some astronomical software packages calculate apparent conjunctions (for example, Dance of the PlanetsTM and RedShift3TM), and some true geometric conjunctions. (Tables kindly provided by E. Myles Standish of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory give geometric conjunctions, but the system could have provided apparent conjunctions just as easily.) The two bodies in conjunction need not, and usually will not, overlap (Albers 1979). Some sources loosely define a conjunction as a gathering of two or more astronomical objects in a limited segment of the ecliptic (Ridpath & Woodruff 1996; Mitton 1993; Brau et al 1980). That is probably taken from pre-modern astronomy and astrology, which sometimes considered objects to be in conjunction if they were a few degrees apart, or even if they were in the same zodiacal sign (i.e. within 30° of ecliptic longitude). Such a configuration is often called a grouping or massing. One must decide how close together the objects must be to be considered a group.
3. Jupiter-Saturn Conjunctions
Among the most impressive planetary conjunctions have been those of Jupiter and Saturn. The two planets are the most majestic and slowmoving of those visible to the eye, and they are brighter than most stars. Their conjunctions occur with reasonable regularity, roughly every 20 years — the precise average is 19.86 years. This year’s conjunction was preceded by one in 1980-81, and will be followed by one in 2020. That is often enough to be remembered, but not enough to be ordinary. Jupiter and Saturn, as viewed from Earth, were in conjunction in geocentric ecliptic co-ordinates on May 28, 2000 (UT), and in geocentric equatorial co-ordinates on May 31. The ecliptic conjunction occurred when Jupiter and Saturn were in the constellation of Aries by modern constellation boundaries, specifically very close to the Aries-Taurus boundary. The equatorial conjunction occurred just on
the other side of the boundary, in Taurus (figure 1). As viewed from the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn were in conjunction in heliocentric ecliptic co-ordinates on June 22, and in heliocentric equatorial co-ordinates on June 21. Of the geocentric conjunctions, the Astronomical Almanac and the Observer’s Handbook note only that of May 31. The Observer’s Handbook also mentions the heliocentric conjunction of June 22. Some geocentric conjunctions occur too close to the Sun for the planets to be visible readily at the moment of conjunction. That was true for the events of AD 2000, in both ecliptic and equatorial co-ordinates. By contrast, the conjunction of 2020, which occurs on the date of the winter solstice, December 21, will be a treat for some people. The planets will be more than 32° degrees east of the Sun, readily visible after sunset. According to Dance of the PlanetsTM, Version 2.71, the equatorial conjunction will occur about 13:30 UT, and will be visible in south central Asia (e.g. Herat, Karachi, and Delhi). The ecliptic conjunction will occur about 18:20 UT, and will be visible in extreme western Europe and northwestern Africa (e.g. Madrid, Lisbon, and Rabat). Unfortunately, neither will be visible in the western hemisphere. Jupiter and Saturn will be closer together (about 6 arcminutes apart) than for any previous conjunction since 1623.
Fig. 1 — The Jupiter-Saturn conjunction of May 28, 2000 in geocentric ecliptic co-ordinates as viewed from Earth, showing the Taurus-Aries boundary (top), and the alternate conjunction of May 31, 2000 in geocentric equatorial co-ordinates (bottom). Fig. 1 was produced using Dance of the PlanetsTM 2.71.



176 JRASC August/October / août/octobre 2000
4. Retrograde Motion and Triple Conjunctions
When the Earth, which moves faster than an outer planet, passes such a planet in orbit, the planet appears to stop its eastward progress through the stars and to reverse direction for a while, then to resume its normal eastward motion. Such a reversal of direction is called retrograde motion. If Jupiter and Saturn are near conjunction when Earth is passing them, we may witness a triple conjunction. Jupiter passes Saturn as both planets advance eastwards along the ecliptic, at which instant they appear to be in conjunction. Jupiter can again pass Saturn after both planets reverse their apparent direction of motion, during their retrograde phase, at which instant a second conjunction occurs. Jupiter passes Saturn one last time when both planets once again appear to reverse direction, moving eastward, producing a third conjunction. That last happened in 1980-81 during the last conjunction of the two planets (e.g. Meeus 1997). Contrary to some sources, particularly those dealing with the Star of Bethlehem (Hughes 1979), triple conjunctions of the two planets do not occur regularly (Victor 1980; Robinson 1981). Triple conjunctions may occur as little as 40 years, or two conjunctions, apart, as they did in 1940-41 and 1980-81, with the single conjunction of 1961 between them. At the other extreme, they may occur as much as 380 years apart (specifically 377 years). The next triple conjunction is expected to occur in AD 2238-39, 258 years after that of 1980-81. Sometimes a conjunction can be a triple conjunction in one coordinate system but not in another. The conjunction of 1425 was triple in ecliptic co-ordinates, but not in equatorial co-ordinates. That of 1821 was triple in equatorial co-ordinates, but not in ecliptic coordinates. Some authors refer to a close grouping of the three outer visible planets, or the three conjunctions that take place among them around that time, as a triple conjunction (Molnar 1999). There was such a grouping in the second week of April, 2000, with Jupiter and Saturn only about 5° apart with Mars between them. Their three ecliptic conjunctions took place on April 6 (Mars-Jupiter), April 15 (MarsSaturn), and May 28 (Jupiter-Saturn). Some groupings are closer. On December 14, 1901, Mars was in conjunction with Saturn, with Jupiter only about 11⁄2° away. Mars always joins the other two within roughly a year before or after a Jupiter-Saturn conjunction, so there can always be a grouping of the three, if the limits are large enough.
5. Constellations and Signs
Because equatorial and ecliptic conjunctions occur on different dates with the planets in different locations, they may occur in different constellations or zodiacal signs, as noted. As an alternative to the disparate widths and unstable boundaries of the ecliptic constellations, the ancient Babylonians standardized the system to twelve equal segments, or signs, each 30° wide and named for its principal constellation. That required a reference point, which the Babylonians established to be Pollux (β Gem), marking the eastern boundary of Gemini (Britton & Walker 1996). Most medieval astronomers set the western boundary of Leo at Regulus (α Leo). Copernicus used Mesarthim (γ Ari) as the western boundary of Aries (Neugebauer 1954). By any such divisions of the signs, the conjunction of AD 2000, in both geocentric co-ordinate systems, occurred in Aries.
6. Stepping Through the Zodiac
Successive Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions develop an interesting pattern as they step around the ecliptic, as noted by Kepler (1981). The pattern is more regular if one uses zodiacal signs of equal length instead of constellation boundaries. Saturn travels through about two-thirds of its orbit, about 240°, between conjunctions with Jupiter. If a conjunction occurs in the sign of Aries, the next will probably occur in Sagittarius, about 240° away, and the third in Leo, another 240° along the ecliptic. The fourth conjunction will likely also occur in Aries, since Saturn completes just over two orbital revolutions of the Sun during the 591⁄2 years covered by three conjunction cycles. The sequence of conjunctions forms a rough triangle inside the zodiacal circle, every fourth sign (see figure 2). Astronomers and astrologers often call the group of three signs involved a triplicity, or trigon. Conjunctions may vary from the normal pattern, sometimes occurring in neighbouring constellations or signs. The apparent positions of the planets are complicated by their relationship to Earth, by their positions in their elliptical orbits, and by variations in their semi-major axes and orbital periods. For example, the triple conjunction of 1940-1941 occurred in Aries, the conjunction of 1961 in Sagittarius, and that of 2000 on the border of Aries and Taurus (in the sign of Aries). But the triple conjunction of 1980-1981 occurred in Virgo, somewhat east of both the constellation and the sign of Leo. Because the interval is roughly 2°–3° greater than 240°, the fourth conjunction does not return to the starting point, but to a location several degrees east of it. Similarly, the fifth is east of the second, and the sixth east of the third. Such eastwards stepwise rotation continues, the conjunctions advancing through the three zodiacal signs of the trigon into the three adjacent signs of the adjacent trigon, then into the next three, etc. Eventually each leg of the triangle steps through four zodiacal signs, and the second leg arrives at a location near the starting point of the sequence. How long does it take? The answer depends upon whether one measures in relation to the fixed stars or the precessing vernal equinox. Relative to the fixed stars, it usually takes about 913 years (46 conjunction intervals), or about 854 years (43 conjunction intervals). For example, the conjunction of AD 2000, near the Aries-Taurus border, fell about halfway between the conjunction of 1087 (east of σ Ari) 913 years earlier, and that of 1146 (near 13 and 14 Tau) 854 years before. With respect to precessing co-ordinates, the sequence usually takes about 794 years (40 conjunction intervals). The conjunction of AD 2000, with Saturn at a right ascension of about 3h 23m, occurred close to that of AD 1206, when Saturn was at a right ascension of about 3h 35m. In the literature on conjunctions, the number is often rounded up to 800 years. Some authors, following Finegan (1964), cite a duration of 805 years for the sequence or for the associated groupings with Mars (Hughes 1979; Molnar 1999). Finegan apparently assumed that Kepler’s conjunction of 1603 paralleled the conjunction of 7 BC, associated with the birth of Christ. Counting that as two successive sequences in 1609 years, he apparently divided by 2 to obtain 804.5 years, or 805 years per sequence. Since 40 conjunction intervals total 794 years, and 41 intervals total 814 years, Jupiter and Saturn would be near maximum separation in 805 years, making a conjunction or a grouping with Mars impossible. Other authors, following Hellman (1944), cite the more precise