---
master_file: "[[@DesanaEliade_LINKED]]"
---
# Index for DesanaEliade_LINKED.pdf

Eliade – Sun-father and the ecstatic universe of Desana Posted on July 25th, 2018 by Lartedeipazzi
The surprising thing is that a parallel with some evolved theologies of light can be found among the Desana, a small Tucano-speaking tribe living in the equatorial forest of the Vaupés River in the Colombian Amazon, whose cultural level (they, among occhio-solareThe other, they despise fishing and agriculture and are dedicated exclusively to hunting) is rather archaic.
For the Desana all creation is an emanation of the yellow-golden light of the sun-father. The Sun-Creator does not really coincide with the star we see in heaven; It is, rather, the creative principle which continues to exist as such and which, although invisible, can be known by its beneficial influence. After concluding his creative activity, the sun retreated to Axpikon-Día, the subterranean paradisiacal region. However, he sent as his representative the star that we see today in the firmament, through which he continues to exert his power by dispensing light, warmth, protection and, especially, fertility.
Solar energy manifests itself through the warm and golden light that has a character of seed. All the divine figures were created by the sun-father because the created themselves under his protection; They are his representatives. All cosmic energies, life and universal fertility, therefore depend on the sun-father. The same human race originated from a few drops of seed falling from the sun's rays. Sun-Father entered a mythical character – Pamuri-Maxë – to lead the ancestors of the tribes of the Vaupés River to the territories they currently inhabit. The trip was made in a huge canoe that was also a gigantic snake [anaconda].
The sexual symbolism implied in this myth is confirmed by the etymology of the name Pamuri, which alludes to the ejaculant phallus: Sun-father would send a new creator to populate the Earth. Sex is the source of life, but it can also be the bearer of death, chaos and destruction. Sun-father committed incest with his daughter; He later died, but he rose again with tobacco fumigations. The crime of incest was followed by a period of chaos, during which beasts and demons appeared in large numbers and endangered the very life of the world. But the creator restored the order, proclaiming the prohibition of incest and thus establishing the first and most important social norm.
sole-luna-piangente
According to Desana, the soul is a luminous element that possesses its own brightness dispensatal from the sun; Every being receives this brightness from the sun. When a soul is dangerously threatened by magical forces, three classes of solar lights are evoked to reinforce it. The second of these is white and associated with the seminal power of the Sun. The whole brightness of the soul is visible only to the initiates, that is to the shamans (exposure in Pajè) and to the priests (kumú).
The soul of the exposure in Pajè is compared to a fire whose light penetrates the darkness and makes every thing visible; It is imagined as a flame that emanates a powerful golden light, similar to that of the sun. A exposure in Pajè has no power without the knowledge that is given to him by the light: he is in fact "a part of the sunlight". And, like sunlight, the light of the shaman's soul is yellow-golden; In other words, ' it represents the fertile virtue of the sun '. Each exposure in Pajè carries a cylinder of yellow or white quartz, called "sun-Foul", on the neck. Each quartz or crystal represents the Manly seed.



On the other hand, the "priest", the kumú, is considered an even brighter character than the exposure in Pajè. It emits a great quantity of internal light, a shining flame, invisible to the uninitiated, revealing the thoughts of each one.
Thus, for the Desanas – and this applies to all the Tucano tribes of the Vaupés area – the Sun-father represents not only a high creator deity, but also the fons and Origo of all sacredness in the universe. As a result, there is an intimate connection between sunlight, sacredness, surreal-donna-fuocoCreativity and sex. Among the Desanas, all representations, characters and religious activities bear a sexual meaning. The reason for this hierophanic pan-sexualism can be seen in the identification of solar light and heat with the origin and perpetuation of cosmic and human life.
Father-Sun coincides with the foundation of being; His activity, both cosmic and spiritual, is a consequence of his ontological fullness. Father-Sun creates by emanation and its kind of cosmogony and Theogony is also the exemplary model of the spiritual activity of man. Father-Sun remains invisible, although sunlight is the source of life and salvation; Similarly, the interior light of the priest and shaman cannot be seen, but can be perceived in its effects and through them.
Since sunlight is conceived as a manly seed "Procreator", it is understandable that the ecstatic iridescent visions provoked by the hallucinogenic Bundleflower plant have been compared to the sexual act. The Tucano say that during the coitus man is "suffocated" and "has visions." According to a myth, the woman-bundleflower was impregnated through her eyes. In fact, the vaginaeye equivalence is familiar to the Toucano. The verb ' to fertilize ' derives from the roots of ' seeing ' and ' laying '.
The bundleflower is ceremonially drunk three or four times a year. The dates are decided by the priest (Kumú), who at a party or in an assembly announces that the Bundleflowerwill be brought. Only men who have made thirty years can participate. Women are present and encourage celebrants with their songs. When the younger men, caught up in nausea, precipitately leave the hut, they laugh contempriously. According to the myth that narrates the origin of this cult, the supernatural woman-bundleflower begat bambino-yajéA child who had "form of light: He was a human being, though it was light; ERA Bundleflower».
Before drinking bundleflower and while drinking it, the cosmogonic myth and mythical tribal genealogies are ceremonially recited. The role of the priest (kumú) is predominant; Explain to the participants the visions they experience. At the beginning the participants feel a strong wind blowing; The Kumú tells them that they are ascending the Milky Way. From here they descend into theAxpikon-Día, the underground paradise, and see a growing number of powerful golden lights, as long as they have the impression of a hail of luminous bodies. The second phase begins with the arrival in the underground paradise; During this phase multiple forms of various colours are perceived. Kumú explains that they are different divine beings and the daughter of the Sun.
To take the Bundleflower is expressed with a verb meaning "to drink and to see" and interpreted with a regression to the cosmic womb, that is at the first moment, when Sun-father began creation.



Indeed, the visions of the participants summarize the Theogony and cosmogony: They see how the SunFather created Divine beings, the world and man; And how the tribal culture was born: social institutions and ethical norms.
The purpose of the Bundleflower ceremony is to reinforce religious beliefs: the participants, in fact, can see with their own eyes that the Theogony and the tribal cosmogony are true. The visions, all in all, allow a personal encounter with supernatural beings, a meeting that is interpreted in sexual terms. An indium educated by the missionaries explains: «Taking the bundleflower is a spiritual coitus; It is spiritual communion, as the priests say. ' On the other hand, it is also said that the one who takes the bundleflower "dies"; The return to the cosmic womb, in fact, amounts to death.
Povos-indios
This is not the place to discuss the relationships of theology and mythology Toucano with hallucinatory experiences. The priest (Kumú), who transmits to the younger generation the traditional meaning of the visions, has a decisive role. But the foundation of all this religious system is the Theologoumenon of the sun-father and, consequently, the connaturality of light, spirit and seed. If all that exists, it lives and reproduces, it is an emanation of the sun, and if the "spirituality" (Intelligence, Wisdom, clairvoyance, etc.) participates in the nature of the sunlight, it follows that every religious act has a meaning at the same time «seminal» and « Visionary '.
The sexual connotations of the experiences of light and hallucinatory visions appear the logical consequence of a coherent solar theology. For the truth, despite its dominant sexual symbolism, the bundleflower drunk ceremonially does not imply any orgiastic aspect. The hallucinatory experience is valued essentially by its ecstatic and luminous nature; Its erotic meanings derive from solar theology, that is, the fact that Sun-father has generated everything and that, consequently, the sunlight is "seminal".
The Desanas are a splendid example of how a specific type of solar religion can enhance the experiences of light and integrate hallucinatory visions into the structure of an ecstatic universe. Some of the equivalences of desanas (e.g. light = sperm) resemble a similar surreal-fiore-fuocoEastern and Mediterranean equivalence. But the South American example also has the merit of calling our attention to the current scarcity of documents concerning the Eastern and Mediterranean area. In fact, compared with the well-articulated theology and Desana mythology and their hallucinogenic ritual, even the best tantric and Gnostic texts seem approximate and incomplete.
The example of Desana, finally, shows us in what sense and to what extent the ecstatic experiences, hallucinatory or not, can enrich and restructure a traditional religious system. It turns out that the series of light-wit-seed-god equivalences, etc. remains "open"; That, that is, the photic experiences are at the bottom likely to receive always new meanings. It is also apparent that the induction of photisms is not limited to a single agent; As agents are attested: extreme asceticism or, conversely, the sexual act; Yogic or otherwise contemplative practices; Spontaneous photic explosions; Erotic techniques aimed at the production of "Magic Heat"; Systematic meditation on fire, sunlight and creativity; Ecstatic and hallucinogenic visions, etc.
What ultimately matters is the religious significance given to the experience of inner light. In other words, the origin of religiously significant photisms should not be sought in the "natural causes" of phosphenes or in the experience of spontaneously or artificially induced phosphenes.



And this for the simple reason that, as recent studies have amply demonstrated, 1) phosphenes of different shapes and colors are known universally, and 2) can induce phospenes with various means, from the simple pressure on the eyelids to the most refined Meditation techniques. What concerns the historian of religions and, in fact, the historian Tout court, are the innumerable valences of the experiences of light, that is to say the creativity of the human mind.
(Eliade, spirit, light and seed)