---
master_file: "[[@GlozelicEtymologicalGlossarypdf]]"
---
# Index for Glozelic etymological glossary.pdf

GLOZELIC
ETYMOLOGICAL
GLOSSARY
PAULOSTEKEL
(HIEROLINGUIST)
"PakîTeô"["In gods' peace" - in glozelic]
Porto Alegre - 2006.



GLOZELIC ETYMOLOGICAL GLOSSARY
(It contains more than 400 roots and about 600 words in Glozelic language)
(OBS.: [v.] verb; [n.] noun; [adj.] adjective; [adv.] adverb; [prep.] preposition; [conj.] conjuntion; [sing.] singular; [pl.] plural; [nom.] nominative; [gen.] genitive; [dat.] dative; [abl.] ablative; [loc.] locative; [pron.] pronoun; [pos. pron.] possessive pronoun; [Dem. Pron.] demonstrative pronoun; [masc.] masculine; [fem.] feminine; [v. adj.] verbal adjective; [comp. N.] compound noun); [pref.] prefix)
Ā
Âd-a - [v.] (GLO - 43.2) Latin has "edo" ("eat; consume, spend"). Protoceltic has *ed-e/o ("eat"). Sanskrit has root "ad" ("eat"). The meaning is "eat". Derived words: *Âd-û-[n.] "food". Âd-ûê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 43.1) "for foods". Âyl-a - [n.] (T10 - l. 1) Protoceltic has *aili- ("cheek") and *elajo- ("swan"). The most adequate meaning is "swan". *Âywet-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *aiwestu-/*aiwito- ("age"). The meaning is "age". Derived word: Âywet-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T03 - l. 2) "by/through ages". Âk-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T42 - l. 3) Protoceltic has *āku- (adj. "fast"). Latin has "acui" (past tense of v. 'aceo' ["be sour/acid"]; dat. of 'acus' ["needle"] meaning "for needle") and "acuo" ("to sharpen, to whet; to excite, incite, animate"). The meaning is "to sharpen, to whet, to animate, to excite; grind, animation; sharpen, animated". Derived word: Âk-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T36 - l. 4) "by/through animated". Âm-a - [n.] (T12 - l. 1) Latin has "ama" ("pail for sacred fires"). The compound word "ini-âma" maybe means "in pail [for sacred fires]". *Âpar-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "appareo" ("to appear, to turn up") and "apparo" ("to prepare, to equip, to set up"). The meaning is "to appear; appearing, sight, vision, apparition". Derived word: Âpar-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T33 - l. 7) "by/through vision/apparition". Âtî - [adv.] (T28 - l. 5) Protoceltic has *ati- (adv. "again"). The meaning is from Protoceltic: adv. "again". Âw - [adv.] (T02 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *awa-/*au-(?) (adv. "away"). The meaning is "away". Is it adv. "well" in T02? Âwta - [Dem. Pron.] (T21 - l. 6) Greek has αυτα [auta] ("them, these, they"). The meaning is "[Dem. Pron.] "them, these, they". If we can read this word like "âw(a)ta", it can be equivalent to gaulish "Aveta" (goddess of birth and midwifery).
Ç = TS
*Çag-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "saga" ("witch, sorceress, hag, magician, fortune-teller") and "sagus" (adj. "who divines, forebodes"). Greek has σαγηνευω [sageneuo] ("to fascinate, to bewitch, to charm, to enchant"). The meaning is " to fascinate, to bewitch, to charm, to enchant; sorcerer, wizard, magician". Derived wordí: Çag-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T08 - l. 2) "by/through sorcerer". *Çî=*Sî- [pron. 3a fem. sing.] Protoceltic has *sī- ("she"). The meaning can be "she; this, that". Derived word: Çy-â = *sy-â- [pron. 3a fem. sing. + Sing. abl.] (T09 - l. 5 - B) Original is "çî = sî"? Variation of "sy-â"? The meaning is "by this". *Çîm-a-[n.] Latin has "sima" ("higher part of crown; top, ridgepole"). The meaning is "top, ridgepole". Derived word: Çîm-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T14 - l. 4) "from top". *Çôl-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "sollus" (adj. "entire, complete, whole" - It is an Oscian word). Protoceltic has *sollo- (adj., n. and pron. "all"). The meaning is "[v.] be entire/complete; [s.][adj.] all." Derived word: Çôl-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T43 - l. 5) "for all". D
Da - [n. or v.] (GLO - 49.5) (T28 - l. 4) (T41 - l. 1) (T18 - l. 5) Variation of "dâ". Latin has "da" (variation of imperative "dic", "tell, call"). Protoceltic has "*dâno-" ("gift") and "*-danos" ("distributing"). Sanskrit has roots "dad" ("to give"), "dâ" ("to give"), "dâta" ("given"). Sumerian has "da" ("to hold; to protect") e "de6,2" ("to bring, carry"). The evolution of this word since proto-indoeuropean can be *dan->*da-/*dâ- . The word "dâta" can have evolved in this way: *dan-ta > *datta>data[glozelic]/dâta[glozelicandsanskrit]/datus[latin]. The meaning is "to give, to bestow, to offer; gift, offering". Derived words: Dâ - [n. or v. in imperative form] (GLO - 52.5) (GLO - 45.3) (GLO 43.1) (GLO - 44.5) (T27 - l. 5) (T36 - l. 2) (T08 - l. 5) (T24 - l. 3) (T24 - l. 7) (T42 - l. 5)
2



(T09 - l. 1 - B) "to give; gift, offering". Dâ-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 44.6) (GLO - 64.3) "for gifts". Dâ-ôû = Dâ-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T11 - l. 5) "in gifts". Dâ-ta - [v. adj.] (T43 - l. 3) (T10 - l. 4) According as latin "datus", "gift/keepsake/godsend"? or "datus", "given"? Does original is "Dâ"? Protoceltic has *dāno- and *φro-dā- ("gift, keepsake, godsend"). The meaning is "given; gift, keepsake, godsend". Date-î = *Dâ-t-e-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (GLO - 52.5) Original is "dat-e/dâte". Latin has "datus" ("gift, present"). Sanskrit has roots "dâ" ("to cut"), "dât" ("to cut, divide"), "datu" ("to divide, separate, participate"), "dô" ("to cut"). The meaning is "in gift". Datj-a - [n.] (T01 - l. 11) Latin has "datio" ("donation, gift"). It is the meaning. Dâ-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (GLO- ? [Liris et al., 1994, p. 35] {GF 18}) (GLO - 51.4, GF 84) "in gifts/donations". Dag-a - [n., v. or adj.] (GLO - 44.4) (T30 - l. 3) (T02 - l. 3) Latin has "dego" ("to take to the end, to spend time lasting or living"). Protoceltic has *dago-/*dego- ("good"); *wo-dagī- ("intention"). Sanskrit has root "dagh" ("to destroy, protect"). Sumerian has "dag" ("resting-place, dwelling, chamber") and "dàg" (adj. "brilliant, pure, clean"). The meaning is "to be well-meaning, be kind, friendly, gentle; good, pure". Here, "the good, the pure". Derived word: Dâg-a - [v. in imperative form] (T01 - l. 10) "be well-meaning!". *Dak-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "daca" ("very vile cheap apples"). Sanskrit has root "dagh" ("destroy, protect"). Sumerian has "dah" ("to add, repeat, help"), "dág" ("brilliant, pure, clean") and "dùg" ("sweet, good; beautiful; favorable; pleasing"). The meaning is "to protect, help, be favourable; protection, help". Derived words: Dâk-a - [v. in imperative form] (GLO - 51.3) "be favourable!". Dak-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T43 - l. 4) [Does original is "Dak-â"/"Dâk-â"?] "in protection or help". Dal-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T14 - l. 4) (T42 - l. 7) (T09 - l. 5 - B) (T01 - l. 4) (T01 - l. 8) Protoceltic has *dāl-/*dāli- ("part"). Sanskrit has root "dal" ("to break; to split; to expand; to open"). The meaning is "to break, split, open; part, partition, division". Derived words: Daly-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T41 - l. 1/2) "by/through break [=end?]". Dal-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T22 - l. 5) "by divisions". *Dalag-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *dalg-e/o- ("hold"). The meaning is "to hold; possession, taking, control, domination, influence". Derived word: Dâlag- - [comp. n.] (GLO - 66.1) "to hold; possession, taking, control, domination, influence". *Dam-a-[n. or v.] Greek has δαμαζω [damazo] ("to tame, dominate"). Micenic greek (Crete) has "da-mo" (acc. greek δαμος [damos]) meaning "village, community". Protoceltic has *dāmā-/*dāmo("host"), dam-je/o ("allow"), *dam-n-a ("bind"), *damo- ("cow") and *domo- ("tame"). Latin has "domus" ("house"). Sanskrit has "dam" ("tame") and "dhâma" ("mansion, dwelling"). The meaning is "to tame, domesticate; house, village, community". Derived words: Dam-e - [n. + sing. dative] (T24 - l. 5) "for house [village]". Dam-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T44 - l. 2/3) (T34 - l. 4) "in house [village]". Dâp-a - [n.] (GLO - 45.3) Greek has δαπανη [dapane] ("expense, consumption") and δειπνω [deipno] ("to dine"). Latin has "daps/dapis" ("dish, titbit, delicacy; dish made from sacrificed victims") and pl. "dapes" ("banquets; viands given to the gods; flesh of victims"). Sanskrit has two roots that seems to make this word like a compound: "dâ" ("to give" or "to cut") + "pâ" ("to drink, feast on, swallow up" or "to protect"), meaning "to offer a feast". The meaning is "feast/dinner-offering". Derived word: Dap-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T42 - l. 2) "for feast". *Daq[w]-a - [n. or v.] If glozelic qopa [q] is [qw], so, we must read "daqwe" not "daqe". Original is "daq-a". Latin has "daca" ("very vile cheap apples"). The meaning is "be vile, be cheap; something cheap or vile". Derived word: Daq[w]-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T38 - l. 5) "for something vile". Dar-a (or Dr-a) - [n. or v.] (T41 - l. 1) Greek has δρυς [drüs] ("oak"). Protoceltic has *dari(k)/*daru-/*derwā- ("oak"), *dar-je/o- ("jump"), *der-/*daro- ("sound"), *der-der-je/o- ("clamour") and *dru(w)- ("run"). Sanskrit has roots "dram" ("to go; to run"), "dru" ("to go, flow, run; to attack"), "drâ" ("to run, fly, be spoiled, sleep") and "då" ("to kill" or "to honour, to care for"). The meaning is "to honour; oak [lit. "honour"]." Here, "oak". Derived word: Dar-o (or Dr-o) - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T06 - l. 3) Original is "dar-a/dr-a". The meaning is "of honour". Dâr(a)ga - [n.] (T16 - l. 9) Greek has Δορκας [dorkas] ("gazelle, stag"). Protoceltic has *derg-ā("redness"), *dergo- ("red") and *drogo- ("wheel"). It may be a deity, like a 'god-stag'. *Dâw-â - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *daw-je/o- ("burn"). The meaning is "to burn; burn". Derived word: Dâwâ-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T26 - l. 6) "for burn". Deyp-a - [n. or v.] (T16 - l. 5) Greek has δειπνω [deipno] ("to dine, feast"). The meaning may be "to dine, feast; dinner, feast".
3



*Dem-a - [n. or v.] Greek has δεμενος [demenos] (adj. "bound") and δημευω [demeuo] ("confiscate" - from where δημιος [demios] - "executioner, hedsman"). The meaning is "to confiscate, bind; confiscation, executioner, hedsman". Derived word: Dem-e-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T25 - l. 1/2) "of hedsman". Dîk-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 65.2,3) Greek has δικαζω [dikazo] ("to judge, adjudicate"). Latin has "dica" ("libel, citation, demand") and "dico" ("to say, tell, pronounce, recite, narrate, call"). Sanskrit has roots "dîkñ" [read "diksh"] ("to be shaved; to perform a sacrifice; to dedicate oneself to") and "dikñ" ("to increase, anoint, smear, soil"). The meaning may be "to judge, pronounce [something sacred]; judgement, [sacred] pronunciation/prononuncement". Dîl-a -[n., v. or adj.] (T24 - l. 6/7) Protoceltic has *dili- (adj. "pleasant"). The meaning is "to be pleasant; pleasure; [adj.] pleasant". *Dî-m-a-[v.] Latin has "dimano" ("to spring, proceed, originate, flow, extend, spread"), union between prep. "di" ["separation, division, increase, negation"] and v. "mano" ["to flow, flow liquor meekly, destil"]. Sanskrit has "dî" ("decay"). Sumerian has "di" ("to conduct oneself, to go, to escape"). The meaning is "to spread, flow [liquid]." Derived words: *Dî-m-ô-[n.] "spread, flow". Dî-m-ô-e [pref. + n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 43.2) "for flowing [of semen?]". *Dod-a-[n.] May be a proper name of unknown deity - Doda. Derived word: Dod-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 3) "of Doda". Dog-a - [n.] (T04 - l. 3/4) Protoceltic has *dog-jo- ("bur [animal]"). The meaning is "bur". *Du- [n. or v.] Latin has "ductus" ("conveyance"; adj. "conducted, carried, guided"), from v. "duco" ("guide, conduct, carry"). Sanskrit has roots "du" ("go" - from where "dûta" - "messenger") and "du" ("to give pain, to burn, to be distressed" - "duta" means "distressed"). Sumerian has "du" ("to walk, to go, to come"). The meaning is "to guide, conduct; conduction". Derived words: Du-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 45.6) "guided, conducted". *Duw-â- [n., v. or adj.] "to guide, conduct; conduction; guide, conductor". Duw-u - [adj. + Pl. abl.] (T17 - l. 7/8) "by guides/conductors [tutelar gods?]". *Dw-a - [n.] Greek has δυο [düo] ("two"). Latin has "duo" ("two"). Protoceltic has *dwā("two" - masc.) and *dwei- ("two" - fem.). Sanskrit has "dvi" ("two"). The meaning is "two". Derived word: Dw-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T30 - l. 2/3) "for two". *Dugnal-a - [n.] Protoceltic has *duknā- ("poem"). May be a proper name of a deity Dugnala. Derived word: Dugnal-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T39 - l. 3/4) "for poem/ Dugnala". *Dûm-a=*Dum-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "dumus" ("thornbush, bramble and any brushwood with thorn"). Sanskrit has root "dhû" ("to shake, excite"). The meaning is "to prick; thornbush, bramble". Derived words: Dûm-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T37 - l. 4) "in thornbush [bramble]". Dûm-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T15 - l. 4) "of thornbushes [brambles]". Dum-w-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T09 - l. 2/3 - A) "for thornbush [bramble]". *Dwuz-a - [n.] Protoceltic has *dous- ("arm"). The meaning is "arm; weapon[?]". Derived word: Dwuz-î - [n.] (T29 - l. 7/8) "in arm [weapon?]". Ĕ
Eâ = *Êâ- [dem. Pron.] (T10 - l. 3) (T34 - l. 6) According as "ea", gen. of Latin dem. Pron. "is" ("this, that"), meaning "of this, of that". It is invariable in glozelic. The meaning is "this, that". Derived word: Ê-î = E-î - [dem. Pron. + sing. loc.] (T12 - l. 6) (T36 - l. 1) "in this". Eâpus(a) - [dem. Pron.] (T33 - l. 5/6) Latin has dem. Pron. "eapse" ("this same or herself"), that may be the meaning. *Eç-a - [n. or v.] Greek has εξη [ekse] ("habit"), εξω [ekso] (adv. and prep. "out"). The meaning is "to be habitual or usual; habit". Derived word: *Eç-î-[adj.] "habitual, usual, customary". Eç-y-o - [adj. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 5) "of habitual". *Ed-a- [n. or v.] Greek has ηδυς [edüs] (adj. "sweet"). Latin has "edo" ("to eat; to consume, spend") and "Edusa" ("goddess that presides over food of boys"). Protoceltic has *ed-e/o- ("to eat"). Sanskrit has root "edh" ("to grow: increase, prosper, extend, swell, rise"). The meaning is "to eat; food". Derived word: Ed-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T18 - l. 3) "for food". *Eg-a=*Êg-a-[v.] Latin has "egenus" (adj. "needy, poor" - from v. "egeo" - "to need, to die, to have need of"). The meaning is "to be needy/poor". Derived words: *Egamm-a - [n.] "need, poorness". *Egamm-î-[adj.] "who becomes poor". Egammy-î - [adj. + sing. loc.] (T03 - l. 3/4) "in that [one] becomes poor". *Egan-a-[adj.] "needy/poor". Egan-e - [adj. + Sing. dat.] (T06 - l. 1) "for needy/poor". Êg-e-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T21 - l. 2) "by poors".
4



*Ejg-u- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *eig- ("cry"). The meaning is "to cry; cry". Derived word: Ejgw-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T21 - l. 1/2) "by cry". Eyn-a - [n.] (T32 - l. 3) Variation of "en-a"? Protoceltic has *en- / *eni- ("in") and *oino("one"). According as acusative numeral greek ενα [ena] ("one"). Latin has "unus" ("one"). Vedic Sanskrit has "êka" and "aêva" (both "one"). Sumerian has "aš" ("one; unique; alone") [maybe an "*ak" or "*ank" in proto-indo-european?]. The meaning is "one [numeral]". Derived word: En-a = Ên-a [n.] (GLO - 52.6) (T24 - l. 4) "one". *Ek-a= Eq-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 8) Greek has ηχεω [ekheo] ("to echo, to resound"). Sanskrit has root "ikh" ("to go, to move") [infinitive is "êkhitum" and participle is "ikhita" - "gone, moved"]. The meaning is "to go/move; going, move". Derived words: Eka-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 39.5) "moved" or "echoed". Eka-t-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (T36 - l. 6) "by gone". Ek-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T42 - l. 6) "for move". El-a - [n. or v.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) (T19 - l. 1) (T42 - l. 5) (T02 - l. 9) (T01 - l. 1) Protoceltic has *ell(ā)-e/o- ("go"). Greek has ελα [ela] ("come along"). The meaning is "to go, to come along; coming along, advancement". *Eloz-a - [n. or v.] Greek has ελος [elos] ("swamp, marsh, bog"), ελωδης [elodes] (adj. "marshy, swampy"). The meaning is "to be swampy/marshy, to bog; swamp, marsh, bog". Derived word: Eloz-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T37 - l. 1/2) "for swamp". Em-a = Êm-a - [pron. 1a sing.] (T22 - l. 1 and 3) (T11 - l. 6) According as greek acusative pronom sing. εμε [eme] ("me") and εμος [emos] (possessive adj. "my"). Protoceltic has *em-em ("he, him") and *emo- (dem. pron. "that"). Sanskrit has forms "aham" ("I" - nom.), "mâm" and "mâ" ("me" ac.), "mahyam" and "me" ("for me" - dat.), "mad" ("by me" - abl.), "mama" and "me" ("of me" - gen.) and "mayi" ("in me" - loc.). Maybe it means "I" [pron. 1a sing.]. See T11 - l. 6: It means "I", but expression "dâôû ema" [lit. "for donations I"] may means "for my donations". Derived words: Em-e - [pron. + sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 9) "for me" or "for my". Êm-a - [pron.] (GLO - 45.3) Variation of "em-a" ["I"]. The meaning is "I", but sometimes "my/mine/me". *Emm-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *em-e/o- ("hold"). Latin has "emo" ("to buy"). The meaning is "to hold/dominate; hold, domination, dominion". Derived word: Emm-ê - [n. + Pl. dative] (T20 - l. 4) "for dominations/dominions". E-ô - [n.] (T12 - l. 6) (T14 - l. 3) Greek has εως [eos] ("dawn"). This is the meaning. Ep-a - [Prep., n. or v.] (GLO- ? [Liris et al., 1994, p. 35] {GF 18}) (GLO - 65.2,3) (T44 - l. 3) (T33 - l. 3) (T03 - l. 7) Greek has επι- [epi-] ("on, over; to, for; before, in front; together") and επος [epos] ("word"). Protoceltic has *uφer-/*uφor- ("over"). Latin has "epoto" ("to drink") and "epotus" ("drunk, absorbed, sipped"). Sanskrit has vedic word "ap" ("water"). The meaning is "[prep.] on, over; to, for; before, in front; together [with]; [v.] to drink, to sip; [n.] drink". *Ep(a)ta - [n.] Greek has cardinal number επτα [epta] ("seven") in ordinal form εβδομος [ebdomos] ("seventh"). Latin has "septem/septimus" ("seven/seventh"). Protoceltic has *sextam and *sextameto ("seven; seventh"). Sanskrit has "saptá/saptamáù" ("seven/seventh"). Glozelic language must have "ep(a)ta/ep(a)tîma" ("seven/seventh"). Here, number "seven". Derived word: Ep(a)tîm-a - [n.] (T24 - l. 2/3) "seventh". Epî - [prep.] (T07 - l. 2) Exactly as greek prep. επι- [epi-] ("on, over; together"). *Eq[w]ît-a- [n. or v.] If glozelic "qopa" [q] has [qw] sound, we must read "eqwîtyo", not "eqîtyo". Latin has "equitium" ("a herd of mares or horses") and "equito" ('to ride; to go horse in gallop"). The meaning is "to ride; herd of horses". Derived word: Eq[w]ît-y-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T39 - l. 5) "from herd of horses". *Er-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "eruo" ("to pull out, to draw out; to ruin, to destroy"). The meaning is "to pull out, to extract, to destroy; extraction, destruction". Derived words: Era-ta - [v. adj.] (T03 - l. 6) "pulled out, extracted, destroyed". *Er-u-[n. or v.] "to pull out, to ruin, to destroy; extraction, ruin, destruction". Eru-wî - [v. in past tense] (T10 - l. 3) "[pron.?] pulled out". Ew- = Êw- = Eû- - [pref.] (T30 - l. 5) (T02 - l. 3) (T02 - l. 4) According as greek prefix (adv.) ευ [eu] ("good; well"). *Ew-dag-a-[pref. + n.] Compound: "ew-" + "dag-a". For "ew-"- See T30 - l. 5. According as greek prefix (adv.) ευ [eu] ("good; well"). For "dag-a" - See GLO - 44.4. The meaning is "to be well-meaning, be good; adj. - good, pure". So, "ewdaga" means "good [perfect?] purity". Derived word: Ew-dag-e - [pref. + n. + sing. dat.] (T02 - l. 3) "for good [perfect?] purity".
5



Ewl-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 64.2) Greek has ευλογω [eulogo] ("to bless"). Latin has "evaleo" ("to be able, to have power"). The meaning is "to be able, to have power, to bless; power, blessing". Ez-a - [n.] (T24 - l. 7) Latin has "esus" (adj. from 'edo' ["eaten, eaten up"]; "action of eat"; "Eso, god who Gauls offered human victims"). Protoceltic has *es- ("to be"). May be a deity name - Eza -, like gaulish Esus.
Ē
*Êd-a-[n. or v.] Greek has ηδυς [edüs] (adj. "sweet"). Latin has "eductus" (adj. "thrown up or pulled out") and "Edusa" ("goddess who presides over food of boys"). Sanskrit has root "edh" ("to grow, to prosper, to extend"). The meaning is "to be sweet; sweetness, gentleness". Derived word: Êdu-th-a - [v. adj.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) ["êd-u-th-a" = "êd-u-t-a"] "anyone who became sweet/gentle". Ê-ô - [conj.] (T11 - l. 2) Greek has 'εως [heos] (conj. "till, until; however, nevertheless"). Latin has "eo" (adv. "so much, as much, toward that place, so"). The meaning of conj. ["till, until; however, nevertheless"] is correct. Êt-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T19 - l. 5) Latin has "et", (conj. "and"). Greek has ηττα [etta] ("defeat, loss"). Protoceltic has *eti- ("beyond, also"). The meaning is "to be defeated, to lose; defeat, loss". *Êw-mat-a=*Ew-mat-a-[n.] Compound: "ê/ew-" + mat-a". For "êw-=ew-"- See T30 l.5. According as greek prefix (adv.) ευ [eu] ("good; well"). For "mat-a" - Protoceltic has *mat("remit"). The meaning is "to remit; remission, forgiveness". So, "êwmata" means "good [complete?] remission". Derived word: Êw-mat-e = *Ew-mat-e - [pref. + n. + sing. dat.] (T02 - l. 4) "for good [complete?] remission". *Êû-[n. or v.] Greek has ευνοω/ευοιωνος [eunoo/euoionos] ("foster, favour/auspicious") and ευ [eu] (adv. "well"). Latin has "eu" (interjection "expression whom approves or praises"). The meaning is "to approve, to praise, to like, to be favourable/auspicious; good, auspice; [adv.] well". Derived word: Êû-ô - [v. in future tense] (T11 - l. 6) "[pron.?] will praise". G
*Gad-a - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *gad- ("go"). Sanskrit has roots "gam" ("to go" - "gata" means "gone") and "gâ" ("to go"). The meaning is "to go; going, walking". Derived words: Gad-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 51.3) (T04 - l. 1) (T03 - l. 7) "by walking/going". Gad-â-ga - [reduplicated v.] (GLO - 45.2) "to go on/without stop, going on/without stop; going on/without stop". Gad-ây - [n. + Pl. nom.] (GLO - 47.5) "the goings". *Gag-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "gigno" ("to generate, to produce"). Sanskrit has root "kag" ("to perform or do anything or act"). The meaning is "to generate, to produce, to perform [works]; production, work". Derived word: Gaga-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 45.4) "produced". Gâyt-a - [n.] (GLO - 66.1) Protoceltic has *gait- ("hair"). The meaning "hair" or "coat" seems to be correct. Gal-a - [n. or v.] (T14 - l. 1/2) (T17 - l. 1) (T29 - l. 1) (T03 - l. 4) Greek has γαλλια [gallia] ("Gaul"). Latin has "galea" ("helmet"), "galeo" ("to arm with helmet"), "Gallia" ("Gaul") and "gallus" ("inhabitant from Gaul; eunuch"). Protoceltic has *galā- ("power"), *gal-e/o/*gal-we/o ("call") and *gallo("stone; foreigner"). The meaning is "to have power; power". Derived words: Gal-î - [adj.] (T33 - l. 1) "strong, powerful". Gal-y-u - [adj. + Pl. abl.] (T28 - l. 3/4) "by powerfuls". *G(a)ley- [n., v. or adj.] Protoceltic has *gleiwo- (adj. "gleaming, clear"). The meaning is "to gleam, to clear; bright, light, gleam; gleaming, clear". Derived word: G(a)leyw-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T09 l. 1/2 - A) "by gleamings". Gam-a - [n. or v.] (T04 - l. 1) (T11 - l. 5) Greek has γαμος [gamos] ("marriage, wedding") and γαμω [gamo] ("fuck, shag, screw"). Sanskrit has "gamya" ("feasible, practicable"). Sumerian has "gam" ("to bend, curve") and "géme" ("woman; slave-girl"). The meaning is "to bend, to curve, to screw, to marry; marriage, sexual intercourse". Derived words: Gam-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T03 - l. 8) "by sexual intercourse". *Gama-ra-[v. adj.] "married". Gama-r-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (T36 - l. 5) "by married". Gam-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T33 - l. 5) "for marriage". Gap-a = Gapp-a - [n. or v.] (T21 - l. 5) (T39 - l. 3) Greek has γαμπα [gampa] ("calf"). This is the meaning. Gar-a - [n.] (T04 - l. 3) Latin has "garus" ("garus fish, a kind of lobster") and "garum" ("sauce made with brine from garus fish intestine"). The meaning is "garus fish". Gât-a = Gat-a - [n. or v.] (T33 - l. 4) (T09 - l. 2 - B) Protoceltic has *gat-e/o- ("let, leave"). The meaning is "to let, to leave; leaving".
6



Gaz-a - [n. or v. ] (T35 - l. 1) Greek has γαστηρ [gaster] ("womb; [adj.] gluttonous"). Latin has "gaster" ("a kind of vase with a big belly"). Sanskrit has root "ghas" ("to eat, to eat up"). The meaning is "to eat, to eat up; food". Derived words: *Gaz-î- [adj.] "eater, devourer, glutton". Gazy-e - [adj. + sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 10) "for devourer". Geg-a - [n. or v.] (T03 - l. 4) Greek has γεγονος [gegonos] ("fact, event, occurrence"). Protoceltic has *gegni- ("laugh"). The meaning is "to laugh; laugh". *Geks-a=Ges-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "gaesum" ("long lance or dart") and "gesa" ("gaulish dart or throw weapon"). Protoceltic has *gaiso- ("spear"). Micenic greek has "gi-si-pe-e" (acc. greek ξιφη
"ksífe") meaning "swords". Sanskrit has roots "kañ"[read "kash"] ("to kill/hurt"), "kaś" [read "kash"] ("to go, to punish") and "geñ" [read "gêsh"] ("to search/investigate"). Sumerian has "kas4" ("to run fast, to gallop, to travel fast; quick, fluent"). The meaning is "to be quick, to travel fast; lance, dart, spear". Derived words: Geks-u = Ges-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T18 - l. 1) "by lances [or darts]". Ges-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 63.3) "to be/travel fast, to throw; throwing object, dart, lance, spear, sword[?]". In GLO - 63.3 the meaning is "Gesa [throwing weapon]". Gemel-a - [n. or v.] (T08 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *gemelo- ("chain"). Latin has "gemellus" (adj. "twin"). The meaning is "to chain; chain". *Gen-a - [n. or v.] Greek has γενεα [genea] ("generation"). Protoceltic has *genet(t)ā("daughter"), *geno-/*genjo- ("birth"), *genti- ("child"), *genu-/*genawā- ("mouth") and *gen-owes ("mouthes" - pl.). Sanskrit has root "jan" ("to be born") and words "jâ" ("son") and "jana" ("race, person"). The meaning is "to generate, to be born; generation, birth". Derived word: Gen-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T03 - l. 1) "for birth". Gyôg-a - [n.] (T39 - l. 1/2) Protoceltis has *gījokkV- ("snipe [bird]"). This is the meaning. *Gyôr-a-[n.] May be a place name - Gyôra. Derived word: Gyôr-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T01 - l. 5) "in Gyôra". *Gleâw - [n.] Protoceltic has *glejo- ("green lawn"). The meaning is "green lawn". Derived word: Gleâw-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T32 - l. 7) "by [=in?] green lawns". Gn-a - [n. or v.] (T19 - l. 3) (T16 - l. 6) (T02 - l. 3) (T09 - l. 4 - A) Protoceltic has *gnā("know"). The meaning is "to know; knowledge, wisdom". Derived words: Gna-m-a - [n.] (T13 - l. 1) (T33 - l. 1) Greek has γνωμη [gnome] ("opinion") and γνωστο [gnosto] ("known"). Protoceltic has *gnāto- ("known"). The meaning is "opinion, knowledge, wisdom". G(a)nâm-a - [n.] (T02 - l. 1) Variation of "gnâm-a". Gnam-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T23 - l. 3) "for knowledge". Gnam-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T08 - l. 6) "by knowledges". Gn-a-r-a - [n, v. or adj.] (T34 - l. 1) Latin has "gnarigo" ("to relate, to tell"), "gnaritas" ("knowledge, information") and "gnarus" (adj. "knowing, informed; aware"). The meaning is "to relate, to tell, to know; knowledge or information about anything; knowing, informed, known". Gn-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T24 - l. 6) "for wisdom". Gn-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T36 - l. 1) (T14 - l. 2) "of wisdom". *Gnô-ta - [v. adj.] Latin has "gnotus/notus" (adj. from "gnosco/nosco" ['to know'], meaning "known, public, notorius"). Here, "known, notorius". Gnô-t-ê - [v. adj. + Pl. dat.] (T33 - l. 7) "for known ones". Gn-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T13 - l. 6/7) (T36 - l. 6) "by knowledges". *Gn-a-t-â - [fem. n.] Latin has "gnata" ("daughter"). Protoceltic has *-gnāto-, *-gnātā- ("son, daughter"). The meaning is "daughter". Derived words: Gn-a-t-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 1) "for son". *Gn-a-t-o-[masc. n.] "son". Gneç-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T12 - l. 7) Greek has γνησια [gnesia] (adv. "genuinely") and γνησιος [gnesios] (adj. "original, authentic, genuine"). Latin has "gnesion" ("the authentic kind of eagle"). The meaning is "to be original/authentic; original, authentic, genuine". Here, "genuine". *Gnep-a-[n., v. or adj.] Greek has γνεφω [gnepho] ("gesture, beckon, motion, signal""). Latin has "gnephosus" (adj. "gloomy, dark"). The meaning is "to gesture, to beckon, to sign; gesture, beckon, signal; gloomy, obscure [because of signals, gestures?]". Derived word: Gnep-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T31 - l. 2/3) "for gesture". *Gn-î-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *gnī-mo- ("labour, pain"). The meaning is "to labour, to pain; labour, pain". Derived words: *Gnî-m-a-[n. or v.] Variation of "gn-î"? Gnî-m-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T34 - l. 5/6) "for labours". Gny-o - [n. + sing. gen.] (T03 - l. 2) "of labour". Gop-a = Gôp-a - [n.] (T32 - l. 6) (T12 - l. 1) Latin has "copa" ("tavern-keeper girl") and "copo" ("tavern-keeper"). Protoceltis has *goppo- ("mouth"). The meaning is "tavern-keeper". *Gow-[n.] May be a proper name - Gow. Derived word: Gow-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T01 - l. 4) "by/through Gow".
7



*Gu-[n. or v.] Micenic greek has "go-u" (acc. greek γFου [gwou]) meaning "cow". Sanskrit has root "gu" ("to speak indistinctly" - adj. is "guta") and word "gô" ("ox, cow" - from root "go" - "to go"?). Sumerian has "gud" ("domestic ox, bull; to dance, leap"). Original of "gu-t-â" must be "gu", meaning "to go, to leap; ox, cow, bull". This is the meaning. Derived words: Gw-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T35 - l. 4/5) (T30 - l. 4) "for ox/cow". Gw-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T43 - l. 1) "in ox/cow". *Gu-ta-[n. + v. adj.] "the [goddess] turned into cow". Gu-t-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 50.2, GF 82) "by [goddess] turned into cow". *Gûgî-[n.] May be a proper name [deity or place]. Derived word: Gûgy-â - [n. + sing. abl.] (T32 - l. 2/3) "by Gûgya".
Î
*Î- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *ī (deictic particle). Latin has "Io" ("Io, Inachus daughter, whom Jupiter turned into a cow"). Sanskrit has roots "i"/"î" ("to go") and "î" ("to go, to impregnate; to become pregnant; to wish, to eat"). Sumerian has "i" ("cry of pain; to capture, defeat, overcome"). The meaning is "to wish, to dominate; wish, domination". Derived words: Y-â = Îy-â - [n. + Sing abl.] (GLO - 65.2,3) (T42 - l. 2) (T16 - l. 6/7) "by wish/by domination". Ye - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T24 - l. 3) "for domination". *Y-ô-[n.] The meaning is "to impregnate, to become pregnant; pregnancy". So, "Iô" is Jupiter's lover and her name means "pregnancy". Y-ô-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 50.2, GF 82) "for Iôs" or "for Iô's priestesses". *Îd-a- [v.] Protoceltic has *indo- ("end"). Latin has "iduo" ("to separate, to divide"). Sanskrit has root "et." ("to annoy, to oppose"). Sumerian has "ída" ("river; main canal; watercourse"). The meaning is "to separate [ritualisticly], to offer." Derived word: Îd-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 44.6) "by offering [of sacred animals]". *Îgn-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "ignio" ("to be on fire, to catch fire") and "ignis" ("fire; love; desire, anger, vehement passion"). The meaning is "to be on fire, to catch fire; fire, desire, anger, passion". Derived word: Îgn-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T32 - l. 2) "by fire". Îkh-a = Îk-a - [n. or v.] (T06 - l. 3) (T16 - l. 7) Greek has εικαζω [eikazo] ("extrapolate, speculate") and forms from v. εχω [ekho] ["to have, to possess"] in past tense ειχα/ειχαμε/ειχε/ειχες [eikha/eikhame/eikhe/eikhes] ("I had, we had, he/she had, you had", respectively). The meaning is "to ponder, to consider, to speculate; consideration, speculation, reflection". *Îkw-e- [n. or v.] Latin has "ico" ("to hurt"). Greek has ικεσια [ikesia] ("supplication"). The meaning is "to hurt, to wound; wound". Derived word: Îkwe-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T13 - l. 4) "by wounds". Îl-a /*Îl-o- [n. or v.] (T03 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *īljo- ("swell"). The meaning is "to swell; swelling, growth, increase, expansion". Derived words: Jal-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 12) Variation of "îl-a". Îlo-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T21 - l. 6) "for growth". *Îm-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "imus" (adj. "lowest; intimate; the last member in a series"). The meaning is "to be lowest; [adj.] lowest". Derived word: Îm-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T23 - l. 4) "for lowest". *În-= În-î- [prep.] (T12 - l. 1) Original is "in-". Protoceltic has *en-/*eni- (prep. "in"). Latin has "in" (prep. "in, against, between, after, till, until, up to"). The prep. is meaning." Îp-a - [n., v. or prep.] (T43 - l. 2) Greek has prep. Υπο [üpo] ("by, through; under"). Protoceltic has *uφo- ("under"). The meaning is "to be under; [prep.] under, by, through". Here, "under". Îpar-a - [n. or v.] (T03 - l. 5) Greek has υπαρχω [üparkho] ("to exist, to subsist, to be in existence"). The meaning is "to exist/subsist; existence, subsistence". Îr-a - [subst. ou v.] (T31 - l. 3) Latin has "ira" ("anger") and "irruo" ("to attack with anger, to assail"). The meaning is "to anger; anger". Derived word: Îr-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T26 - l. 5/6) "of anger". Îrôr-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 51.4, GF 84) Latin has "irroro" ("to bedew, to sprinkle, to fill with dew"). The meaning is "to bedew, to fill with dew; dew". *Îs-a - [n. or v.] Greek has ισος [isos] (adj. "equal, even") and ισως [isos] (adv. "perhaps, possibly"). The meaning is "to be equal/even; equality, evenness; equal, even". Derived word: Îs-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 44.5) "by equalities". Ît-a - [n., v., adj. or adv.] (T15 - l. 3) (T32 - l. 5) (T17 - l. 6) (T29 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *i-tā(je/o) ("go"). The meaning is "to go; going, departure; gone, left [from]". Ît-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T33 - l.
8



2) "by going". Ît-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T42 - l. 3/4) "of going". Ît-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T38 - l. 5/6) "by goings/departures". *Îtaç-a-[n.] Latin has "Itys" ("Ítis, Tereus' son [king of Thracia], turned into a bird; pheasant: bird"). The meaning is "pheasant". Derived word: Îtaç-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T23 - l. 3/4) "in pheasant". Îz-a - [n. or v.] (T27 - l. 2) (T36 - l. 2/3) (T01 - l. 4) Sanskrit has roots "îç" [read "ish"] ("to
rule, to command, to have power") and "iñ" [read "ish"] ("to go" or "to wish" or "to repeat"). The meaning is "to have power, to command, to rule; possession of power, command". Derived words: Îzî - [n. + sing. loc.] (T40 - l. 3/4) "in possession of power". Îz-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T05 - l. 1/2) "of commands".
Y = J/Ĭ
Jâg-a - [n. or v.] (T14 - l. 7) Protoceltic has *jagi- ("ice"). Greek has παγος [pagos] ("ice"). The meaning is "to freeze, to ice; ice". *Jan-a- [n.] Latin has "Iana/Jana" ("Diana, goddess of woods; the Moon"), "janua" ("door, occasion, opportunity") and "Janus" ("Janus, god of gentilism"). It seems to be "Diana", goddess of woods, reverenced by lowest ranks, including slaves. The meaning is "Diana". Derived word: Jan-î [n. + sing. loc.] (T17 - l. 2) (T29 - l. 2) "in Jana [Diana]". *Japan-a- [n., v. or adj.] Protoceltic has *iφāno- (adj. "right"). The meaning is "to be right; [adj.] right". Derived word: Japan-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T13 - l. 4/5) "of right". *Ye- [n. or v.] Latin has "iens" (adj. "who goes, walks"). The meaning is "to go, to walk". Derived words: Ye-ta - [v. adj.] (T03 - l. 8) "who goes/walks". Ye-t-ê - [v. adj. + pl. dat.] (T42 - l. 5/6) "for that [ones] going/walking". Ye-t-o - [v. adj. + Sing. gen.] (T13 - l. 1) "from one who goes/walks". *Yek-a - [n. or v.] Greek has υγεια [ügeia] ("health") and υγιης [ügies] (adj. "healthy"). Protoceltic has *jakko- (adj. "healthy") and *jīkkā- ("healing"). The meaning is "to heal, to be healthy; healing". Derived word: Yek-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T32 - l. 1/2) "in healing". *Yem-a- [n. or v.] May be variation of "kîyâma/kjâma" (T15 and T41), close to latin form "hiems" or "hyems". The meaning is "to winter, to be winter; winter, cold". Derived word: Yem-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T17 l. 1) (T29 - l. 1) "of winter". *Yod-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *ioudo-walo ("battle-leader"), in which *ioudo- means "battle". The meaning is "battle". Derived word: Yod-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T05 - l. 3) "by battle". *Joq-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "joca/jocus" ("gallantry, mockery, joke") and "joco" ("to play, to mock, to joke"). The meaning is "to play, to mock, to joke; mockery, joke". Derived word: Joq-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T02 - l. 5) "by mockeries". *Yu-According as Latin "jugus" ("yoke")? Protoceltic has *jugo-, *jugā- ("yoke"). The meaning is "to join, to unite; union". Derived words: Yw-â = Îw-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T44 - l. 1) (T20 - l. 3) "by union". Yuka - [n. or v.] (T04 - l. 3) Latin has "jugus" ("yoke"). Protoceltic has *jugo-/*jugā- ("yoke"). Greek has ζυγος [zugos] ("yoke; balance"). Sanskrit has vedic word "Yuga" ("yoke; duration of time") and "yukta" ("united, attentive"), both from root "yuj" ("to unite, to join"). The meaning is "to unite, to join; union, yoke". Yu-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 44.3) Latin has "jûtum", ("to help, to assist") that may be originated from same root of "jugum" ("yoke"). Sanskrit root "yut" means "to bright", but "yu" means "to mix; to join; to separate" [originating "yuta" - "mixed, joined, united"]. The final meaning is "united" or "assisted". Yûç-a - [n.] (T19 - l. 2) Latin has "jus" ("law, justice, rule") and "jussio/jussum/jussus" ("mandate, order, rule"). Protoceltic has *justjo- (adj. "just"). The meaning is "law, justice, rule, order". K
*Kad-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "cado" ("to fall, to slip; to die"). Protoceltic has *kādo(s)- ("anger") and *kād(j)o- ("sacred"). Sanskrit root "kad" means "to be confounded; to grieve; to destroy". The meaning is "to die, to fall, to destroy; death, falling, destruction". Derived word: Kad-â - [n. + sing. abl.] (GLO 45.5) (T06 - l. 1/2) (T11 - l. 1/2) (T24 - l. 2) "by death". Kâg-a = Kag-a - [n. or v.] (T10 - l. 2) (T08 - l. 1/2) Protoceltic has *kagi- ("fence"). The meaning is "to fence; fence". Kaj-a - [n.] (T05 - l. 7) Protoceltic has *kajo- ("house"). This is the meaning. Kak-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T38 - l. 5) (T02 - l.1) (T01 - l. 11) Greek has κακος [kakos] ("bad, wicked, evil"). Latin has "caco" ("to defecate"). Protoceltic has *kakkā- ("excrement") and *kakk-āje/o("to defecate"). The meaning is "to be bad/wicked/evil, to defecate; evil, excrement; bad, evil".
9



Derived words: Kak-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T42 - l. 8) "by evil". Kak-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T18 - l. 6) (T16 - l. 2) "of evil". Kal-a - [n, v., adj. or adv.] (GLO - 63.3) (T44 - l. 1/2) (T02 - l. 10) Protoceltic has *kailā("[good] omen"). Greek has καλα [kala] ("good"). Sanskrit has root "kal" ("to sound; to count; to throw; to go, to hold, to know, to regard") and words "kalya" ("clever, well; deaf and dumb") and "kalyân.a" ("beautiful, lucky"). Sumerian has "kal-" ("to esteem, value; to be rare; to be appreciated; excellent; precious, valuable"). The meaning is "to be good, to be valuable/esteemed/appreciated, to presage; goodness, esteem, valorization, [good] omen; good, esteemed, valuable; well". Derived words: Kal-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T03 - l. 8) (T09 - l. 2 - B) "for [good] omen". Kal-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T09 - l. 5 - A) "of esteem/valorization". Kal-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T42 - l. 1) "by [good] omens". *K(a)lad-a - [n. or v.] Greek has κλαδευω [kladeuo] ("prune, lop, trim"), κλαδι [kladi] ("branch, limb") and κλαδος [klados] ("branch"). Protoceltic has *klad-je/o- ("dig") and *klado-/*klādo("ditch"). Sanskrit has root "klad" ("to make defective"). The meaning is "to prune/lop/trim; branch, limb, ditch". Derived word: K(a)lad-â - [n. + sing. abl.] (GLO - 51.4, GF 84) "by branch". K[a]lak[a]t[a]ta - [n.] (T05 - l. 6) A possible reading is "klaktta". Greek has γαλακτος [galaktos] ("milk"). Protoceltic has *laxto-/*glaxtā- ("milk"). The meaning is "milk". Derived word: K[a]lak[a]tte - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T05 - l. 5) A possible reading is "klaktte". Here, "for milk". *Kalw-e - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *klewos- ("fame"). Latin has "cluens" (adj. "who is famous/renowned or notorius") and "clueo" ("to be famous/renowned"). The meaning is "to be valuable/esteemde/appreciated; esteem, valorization; esteemed, valuable". Derived word: Kalwe-ta [v. adj.] (GLO - 42.5) "esteemed" or "famous". Kam-a - [n. or v.] (T39 - l. 6) (T01 - l. 9/10) Greek has καμενος [kamenos] ("charred"). Protoceltic has *kamawo- ("sorrow"). The meaning is "to char, to burn a little; burning". God "Camma"? Derived words: Kâm-a - [v. in imper. form] (T02 - l. 4) "char it!". Kam-î - [n. + sing. loc.] "in burning". Kam-wî - [v. in past tense] (T10 - l. 1/2) "[pron.?] charred". Kan-a - [n. or v.] (T05 - l. 7) Latin has "cano" ("to sing; to prognosticate, to prophesy") and "canus" (adj. "who has white hair; white"). Protoceltic has *kan-e/o- ("to sing"). The meaning is "to sing, to prognosticate, to prophesy; prophetic chant, prognostic". Kap-a - [n. or v.] (T36 - l. 1) Latin has "capio" ("to take up, to hold, to catch; to receive; to captivate, to capture). Protoceltic has *kaφ-e/o- ("to attain"). The meaning is "to attain; attainment". Derived word: Kapj-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 3) Variation of "kap-a". Kar-a - [n. or v.] (T19 - l. 3) Latin has "carus" (adj. "dear, expensive, costly; dear, beloved"). Protoceltic has *kar-a(j)e/o- ("to love"). The meaning is "to love, to desire; love". *Kas-a-[n.] Latin has "caso" ("to fall ever and anon"), "casus" ("falling, ruin, sickness; hazard, good or bad fate") and "Casus" ("roman god"). The meaning is "falling, ruin, sickness, hazard, [good or bad] fate; Casus [deity]". Derived word: Kas-î - [n.] (T42 - l. 7) "in Kasa [god of good or bad fate]". Kasîl-a - [n.] (T12 - l. 2) Latin has "caseale" ("cheese-making, house"). The meaning is "cheesemaking". *Kat-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "cate" ("cautiously, sagaciously, prudently") and "catus" (adj. "cautious, prudent, wise, sagacious"). Protoceltic has *kato- (adj. "wise"). The meaning is "to be cautious, to be wise/sagacious/prudent; caution, prudence, wisdom, sagacity". Derived words: Kat-â [n. + Sing. abl.] (T35 - l. 6) "by wisdom/caution". Kat-ê - [n. + pl. dat.] (T16 - l. 7) "for sagacities/cautions". *Katak-a- [n., v. or adj.] Greek has κατακαιω [katakaio] ("to burn down"). Protoceltic has *katāko- (adj. "warlike"). The meaning is "to destroy, to make war; destruction, war; warlike". Derived word: Katak-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 65.2,3) "by war". *Kaz-a-[n. or v.] Greek has χαζευω [khazeuo] ("to hang about, to loiter") and χαζος [khazos] ("silly, stupid, foolish, fool, dumb"). Latin has "casse" ("in vain"), "cassesco" ("to vanish") and "cassus" (adj. "vain, empty"). The meaning is "to be vain, to be useless, to hang about, to loiter; vain/useless act; stupid, foolish". Derived words: Kaz-e - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T27 - l. 2/3) "for vain act". Kazz-a - [n. or v.] (T15 - l. 5) Variation of "kaz-a". Key = Kî - [conj. or adv.] (T34 - l. 5) (T01 - l. 6) (T01 - l. 8) Protoceltic has *kei- (dem. pron. "this; [adv.] there; to go") and *kei-/*ki- (conj. "although"). The meaning is "although; there". Kêjl-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *keiljo- ("companion"). The meaning is "to accompany; companion".
10



Kem-a - [n. or v.] (T26 - l. 4/5) Greek has κειμαι [keimai] ("to lie, to be situated"). Latin has "cemos" ("king's crown: plant"). The meaning is "to lie, to be situated; disposition, situation". Khwe - [conj.] (T33 - l. 6) Latin has conj. "que" ("still; because; or"). This is the meaning. Here, "still". *Kîg-a - [n. or v.] Greek has καυγας [kaugas] ("quarrel, scuffle"). Sanskrit has "kag" ("to perform or do anything or act"). Sumerian has "gig" ("illness; injury; to be/make sick"). The meaning is "to fight, to quarrel, to injure, to make sick; fight, war, injury, ill". Derived word: Kîg-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (GLO - 44.4) "in war [quarrel]". Kîyâm-a - [n or v.] (T15 - l. 5/6) Latin has "hiemo" ("to winter, to be winter") and "hiems/hyems, hyemis" ("winter; storm; cold"). Protoceltic has *gajamo-/*-gijamo ("winter"). The meaning is "to winter, to be winter; winter, cold". Derived word: Kjâm-a - [n. or v.] (T41 - l. 2/3) Variation of "Kîyâm-a". *Ko - [n. or v.] Micenic greek has "ko-wa/ko-wo" (acc. greek κορFαι/κορFοι "kórwai/kórwoi") meaning "girls/boys". The meaning is "to be young; young, boy/girl." Derived word: Kô-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GlO - 45.4) "for youngs [or young animals]". *Koy-e-[n., v., adv. or adj.] Greek has κοινα/κοινως [koina/koinos] (adv. "commonly"). Latin has "coiens" (adj. "who binds/joins or joins closely together"). Protoceltic has *koin-je/o- ("to cry"). The meaning is "to bind/join, to join closely together; [adj.] who binds/joins or joins closely together". Derived word: Koye-ô - [adj. + Pl. gen.] (T13 - l. 2/3) Here, "of whom join". *Kraks-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *krako- ("stone"). Latin has "crassesco" ("to thicken, to fatten, to harden, to be condensed") and "crassus" (adj. "thick, fat"). The meaning is "stone". Derived word: Kraks-ê - [n. + pl. dat.] (T01 - l. 6) "for stones". *Ku-[n. or v.] - Greek has κυων [küon] ("dog"). Latin has "canis" ("dog or bitch"). Protoceltic has *kwu-/*kun- ("dog"). Sanskrit has vedic "śvan" [read "shwan"] ("dog") and roots "śvi " ("to move, to increase, to grow, to swell") and "śun" ("to go"). Sumerian has "kun" ("tail"). The meaning "dog" is obvious. Masc. may be "kû" ("dog") > "kû(n)e" ("for dog"). Fem. may be "kûâ" ("bitch") > "kûâ(n)e ("for bitch"). The original word "ku" means "to go, to increase, to grow; increase, growth, multiplication". Derived words: *Kû-[masc. n.] - "dog". *Kû-â-[fem. n.] - "bitch". Kûâ-n-e - [fem. n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 58.2,3,4) "for bitch". May be a goddess - "Kûâna". Kwe - [interrogative and relative pron.] (T32 - l. 6) The meaning is "who, whom". Kwey - [pron. and relative pron.] (T19 - l. 3) Latin has "queis" ("to whom") and "quis" ("who?"). Protoceltic has *kwei- (adv. "to where"), *kwei-(jo) (pron. "who") and *kwi-ow- ("whose is"). It is possible that *kwe is "who [interrogative and relative]" and kwey is "who [relative]; that (one)[pron.]". Here, "that ones". *Kug-a-[n. or v.] Greek has κυκεωνας [kükeonas] ("confusion"). Latin has "cucus" ("a kind of tree like palm-tree; cuckoo: bird"). Protoceltic has *kouko/*kukā- ("cuckoo: bird"). Sanskrit has roots "kuj" ("to make any inarticulate sound, to hum; to coo; to warble") and "ku" ("to sound"), "kû" ("to sound"). The meaning is "to hum, to coo, to warble; warble, cuckoo". Derived word: Kug-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 49.5) "for cuckoo". *Kw-î-[n. or v.] Latin has "quitus" (adj. of 'Queo' ["to be able (to)"], meaning "that is able"). The meaning is "to be able (to); ability to". Derived word: Kwî-t-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (T02 - l. 9) "by who is able (to)". *Kul-a-[n. or v.] Greek has κυλω [külo] ("roll, stream, ooze"). Latin has "culeum/culeus" ("hide bag; a war instrument"). The meaning is "to roll, to stream, to ooze; stream [slow], flow, fluency". Derived word: Kul-e - [n. + sing. dat.] (T08 - l. 6/7) "for fluency". *Kwos-a- [n.] May be a proper name - Kwosa. Derived word: Kwos-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 8) "of Kwosa". *Kup-a- [n. or v.] Greek has κουπονι [kouponi] ("token"). Protoceltic has *kuφnā- ("heap"). The meaning is "to token, to signal, to prove, to testify; token, signal, proof, testimony". Derived word: Kupa-n-a - [n.] (T02 -l. 6) "token, signal, proof, testimony". *Kûpal(y)-aor*Kûpl(y)-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *kuφlā- ("burden"). The meaning is "to be heavy; burden". Derived word: Kûpaly-e or Kûply-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T07 - 11/2) "for burden". *Kût-a-[n. or v.] Greek has κουτος [koutos] (adj. "foolish"). Protoceltic has *(s)kutu- ("head"). Sanskrit has roots "kut" ("to cover"), "kuth" ("to become putrid; to hurt") and "kûö" ("to burn, to give
11



pain; to avoid giving; to render indistinct or unintelligible"). The meaning is "to be fool; silliness; foolish". Derived word: Kût-ô - [adj. + Pl. gen.] (T11 - l. 3/4) "of fools". Kuupat-a - [n. or v.] (T25 - l. 4/5) Latin has "cuppedo/cupedo" ("covetousness, greediness"). The meaning is "to desire, to covet; covetousness, greediness". Kh
Khaz-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T03 - l. 3) Greek has χαζευω [khazeuo] ("hang about, loiter") and χαζος [khazos] (adj. "silly, stupid, foolish, fool, dumb"). The meaning is "to hang about, to loiter; vagancy, idleness, wandering; stupid, foolish".
KS = X
*Ksad-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *sadī- ("hilt") and *sādo- (adj. "easy, quiet"). The meaning is "hilt, dagger". Derived word: Ksad-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T24 - l. 8) "in hilt/dagger". *Ksal-a - [n. or v.] Greek has ξελογιαζω [kselogiazo] ("seduce"). Sanskrit has "kñal" [read "kshal"] ("to wash, to cleanse; flow, wash"). The meaning is "to seduce, to flow [toward]; seduction, flow". Derived word: Ksal-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T04 - l. 4/5) "of seductions". Ksûm-a - [n.] (T14 - l. 6) May be an unknown plant. L
Lad-a - [n., v. or adv.] (GLO - 45.6) (GLO- ? [Liris et al., 1994, p. 35] {GF 18}) (GLO 65.2,3) (T24 - l. 2) Latin has "laeto" ("to make merry, to gladden") and "laetus" ("merry, cheerful, joyous; fertile, abundant"). Sumerian has "la" ("abundance, luxury, wealth; bliss, happiness"). The meaning is "to merry, to be happy, to be fertile/abundant; merry, bliss, happiness, fertility, abundance; cheerfully or abundancely". Derived word: Lad-â - [n. + sing. abl.] (GLO - 44.1) (T10 - l. 4) (T29 - l. 3) "by abundance". Lâed-a - [n. or v.] (T38 - l. 1/2) Greek has λοιδορω [loidoro] ("insult"). Latin has "laedo" ("to offend, to hurt, to treat ill, to damage"). Protoceltic has *laid-je/o-/*loid-je/o- ("insult"). The meaning is "to insult, to offend; insult, offence". Lag-a - [n. or v.] (T30 - l. 5) (T35 - l. 1) (T18 - l. 5) (T08 - l. 3/4) (T16 - l. 3) Sanskrit has roots "lag" ("to adhere to, to touch, to porduce an effect; to taste, to obtain") and "lâgh" ("to be able"). The meaning is "to be able; ability; able". Derived words: *Laga-ta-[v. adj.] "able". Laga-t-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 45.4] "by [among animals] which is able". *Lagann-a-[n.] Latin has "laganum" ("a kind of fritter"). The meaning is "laganum [a kind of fritter]". Derived word: Lagann-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T04 - l. 2) "of lagana [fritters]". Lâgn-a =*Lagn-a- [n.] (T05 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *lagīnā- ("spear"). Sanskrit has "lagna" ("devoted, attentive; confused; bard, panegyrist"). The meaning is "bard, poet". Derived word: Lagn-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T38 - l. 6) "in bard/poet". *Laj-a- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *lā-(j)e/o- ("send"). The meaning is "to send; remittance". Derived word: Laj-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T23 - l. 4/5) "of remittances". Lak-a - [n. or v.] (T38 - l. 1) (T16 - l. 1) Greek has λακαω [lakao] ("to burst"). Latin has "lacer" ("shattered, quartered; consumed, spoiled"). Sanskrit has root "lakh" ("to go, to move"). The meaning is "to burst, to shatter; laceration, quartering". Derived words: Lak-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 46.1) "by lacerations". Lak-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (GLO - 58.2,3,4) "in lacerations". *Lal-a-[n. or v.] Greek has λαλεω [laleo] ("to tell, to say") and λαλια [lalia] ("saying"). Latin has "lalax" ("who shouts or bawls") and "lallus" ("singing of children's nurses in order to cause to sleep in boys; tutelar genius of children's nurses"). The meaning is "to tell, to say, to shout; speech, word, saying, shout". Derived word: Lal-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T41 - l. 4) "by speech". Lam-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 51.3) Latin has "Lamus" ("a Neptun's son"). Sumerian has "lam" ("abundance, luxuriance; to grow luxuriantly"). In Sanskrit "Lam" is a sacred syllable representing Universal Principle (Tattva) Prithivî (Earth and Smell). May be a proper name, "Lama" (acc. Latin "Lamus"), meaning "to abound". The meaning is "to abound; abundance". Derived words: Lam-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T09 - l. 3/4 - B) "of abundance". Lam-u - [n. + Pl. abl. or adv.] (T18 - l. 6) "by abundances; abounded; very, much". Lan-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 45.6) Protoceltic has *lannā- ("scale") and *wlanā- ("wool"). Latin has "lana" ("wool"). Sumerian has "la" ("abundance, wealth; bliss, happiness"). The meaning is "wool" = "abundant, plentiful"? [v.] "to abound"? Lâo - [n.] (T08 - l. 1) (T03 - l. 10) Greek has λαος [laos] ("people"). This is the meaning.
12



Lap-a - [n. or v.] (T44 - l. 5) (T14 - l. 1) Latin has "lapio" ("to petrify") and "lapis" ("stone"). Sumerian has "lub" ("axe for agricultural use or like weapon"). The meaning is "to petrify; stone, [stone]axe". Derived word: Lâp-î - [n. + sing. loc.] (T39 - l. 6) "in [stone]axe". *Lar-a- [n.] Protoceltic has *lāro- ("only, alone"). Latin has "lar" ("house, inside of house; home, chimney, cooking-stove; tutelar god of a house or family"), "Lara/Larunda" ("Lara, nymph, mother of Lares or houses' gods") and "Lares" ("Lares, gods of houses or families"). The meaning is "home, house, tutelar god; [pl. - Larâi] tutelar gods". Derived word: Lar-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T33 - l. 3) "for tutelar god". Las-a - [n. or v.] (T08 - l. 8) Latin has "lass-us" ("tired"), from "lass-o" ("to tire"). The meaning is "to tire; tiredness". Derived words: Las-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 43.1) (T28 - l. 1/2) "for tiredness". Las-û-e = *Laswê-[n. + pl. dat.] (GLO - 44.2) "for tirednesses[?]". Lasg-a - [n. or v.] (T35 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *lasko- (adj. "slack"). The meaning is "to be slack; rest, slowness, negligence". Lat-a - [n. or v.] (T37 - l. 5) (T26 - l. 4) (T03 - l. 9) Greek has λαθειν [lathein] (infinitive of λανθανω [lanthano], "to hide [oneself]; to be ignorant of, not to know"), λατομεω [latomeo] ("to dig, to carve") and ληθη [lethe] ("forgetfulness"). Latin has "lateo" ("to be hidden, concealed, to hide [oneself]") and "latus" (adj. "brought, carried"). Protoceltic has *latākā-/*latjo- ("mud"). The meaning is "to bring or carry, to transport, to hide, to protect; transportation, hiding, protection". Derived words: Lata-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 58.2,3,4) Latin has "lator" ("who brings/carries") and "latus" ("brought or carried"). Here, "carried/transported". *Lat-î-[adj.] "hidden, protected". Lat-y-â - [adj. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 50.1) "by hidden/ protected". Lat-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (GLO - 64.2) "of protection". Laz-a = Lazz-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 52.2) (T05 - l. 1) (T17 - l. 4) (T29 - l. 4) Latin has "laesio" ("hurt") and "laesus" ("hurt, mistreated, violated"). Sanskrit has roots "lâ" ("to take; to give; to melt") and "lî" ("to melt; to adhere to, to be absorbed, to be dissolved, to hide in, to rest on, to disappear"). Sumerian has "lah4,5" ("to bring; to drive off; to plunder, capture, take away"). The meaning is "hurt; to hurt, to wound, to melt, to capture". Derived words: Laz-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T07 - l. 3/4) "of [mortal] hurt". *Laz-u- [v. adj.] "hurt, wounded, molten, captured". Laz-w-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (T08 - l. 7/8) "by wounded". Laz-gat-a - [compound n.] (T17 - l. 4) A compound with "laz-a + gat-a". For "Laz-a"-See GLO - 52.2. The meaning is "hurt; to hurt, to melt, to capture". For "Gat-a"="Gât-a"- See T33 - l. 4. The meaning is "to let, to leave; leaving". The meaning of this compound may be "to leave for capture". Here, "[who] leaves for capture [hunting?]". *Le-[n. or v.] Latin has "levi" (past for 'leo' ["to be light? to kill? to be strong?"] and 'lino' ["to anoint"]). Greek has λεια [leia] ("prey, smoothly, spoils"), λειος [leios] ("smooth, sleek") and λεω [leo] ("tell, say"). The meaning may be "strength, power, spoil; to be strong, to spoil". Derived word: Le-wî - [v. in past tense] (T24 - l. 1) "[?] became strong". Leg-a - [n. or v.] (T20 - l. 2) Greek has λεγω ("tell, say"). Latin has "lego" ("to gather, to pick, to harvest; to elect, to choose; to read"). Sanskrit has "lekha" ("outline, line; letter, character [of letter]; letter, missive"). The meaning is "to gather, to choose, to read; gathering, choose, reading". Derived word: Leg-wo - [v. in future tense] (T34 - l. 2) "[?] will gather". Lem-a - [n. or v.] (T22 - l. 1) Latin has "limo" ("to slime, to splash"). Protoceltic has *līmo("flood"). The meaning is "to flood, to be flooded; flood, overflow". Leph-a - [n.] (T08 - l. 2/3) Latin has "lepis" ("scale, conch"), "lepos/lepor" ("joke, gallantry in speech; urbanity, gentleness, amenity") and "lepus" ("hare"). The meaning is "joke, urbanity, gentleness, amenity". Ler-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T19 - l. 3) Protoceltic has *leiri- (adj. "complete"). The meaning is "to be complete; [adj.] complete". *Lî-[n. or v.] Greek has λιωνω [liono] ("melt, grind, thaw"). Sanskrit has roots "lî" ("to melt" "lîta" ["molten"] and "letum" [infinitive]) and "lî" ("to adhere to, to be absorbed, to be dissolved, to hide in, to rest on, to disappear" - "lîna" ["adhered, glued"] and "lâtum" [infinitive]). The meaning is "to melt, to to pacify; dissolution, dissipation." Derived words: Lyâ-oo = *Lyâ-ô -[n. + pl. gen.] (T16 - l. 3) "of dissolutions". Ly-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 64.3) "for dissolution". Lît-a - [n. or v.] (T40 - l. 4) Latin has "lito" ("to placate with sacrifice; to offer in a sacrifice; to immolate, to sacrifice"). Greek has λιτος [litos] (adj. "frugal, abstemious, terse"). Protoceltic has *līto("feast"). The meaning is "to immolate, to sacrifice, to feast [in sacrifice]; sacrifice, [sacrificial] feast".
13



Ljad-a - [n. or v.] (T05 - l. 1) Greek has λιαζομαι [liadzomai] ("bask"). This is the meaning. Ljam-a - [n. or v.] (T34 - l. 3/4) Protoceltic has *limo- ("elm") and *līmo- ("flood"). Latin has "lima" ("file [for smooth iron]"), "limo" ("to file, to smooth" or "to slime, to splash") and "limus" (adj. "crooked, oblique, blique"; "slime, excrement"). The meaning is "to slime, to splash; slime, mud, mire". Lo - [n. or v.] (T42 - l. 4) Latin has "laus" ("praise, eulogy, glory, esteem"). Protoceltic has "*laudo-" ("saying'). The meaning is "to praise, to honour, to esteem; praise, honour". Derived words: Lô - [v. in imperative form] (GLO - 49.2) (T42 - l. 5) "praise!". Lô-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 65.2,3) "for praise". *Lok-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "loco" ("to put, to place; to rent; to spend") and "locus" ("place; time, interval of time; occasion, opportunity"). Sanskrit has "loka" ("place, region, word" - from root "lok/loc" - "to see, to perceive"). The meaning is "to put, to place, to rent, to spend; place, occasion, opportunity". Derived word: Lôk-a - [v. in imperative form] (T35 - l. 5) "spend!". Lu - [n. or v.] (T14 - l. 4) Latin has "lavo" ("to wash, to bathe"). Greek has λουω [louo] ("to wash, to bathe"). Protoceltic has *lawo- ("water"). Sumerian has "lù" ("to disturb, agitate, trouble; to fluster, embarass; to stir, blend"). The meaning is "to wash, to bathe, to agitate, to mixture [liquid]; water, mixture [of liquids]". Derived words: *Lo-ta- [v. adj.] Latin has "lotio" ("washing, bath") and "lotus" (adj. from 'lavo' meaning "washed"; "washing, bath"). The meaning is "washed". Lo-t-e - [v. adj. + Sing. dat.] (T36 - l. 1/2) "for [who] washed [ritualisticly]". Lw-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 55) "by water". Lû-e = *Lw-e- [n. + Sing. dat.] (T02 - l. 2) Variation of "lw-e" - "for mixture". Lw-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (GLO - 50.1) (GLO - 44.5) In GLO - 50.1 means "in water". In GLO - 44.5 means "in mixture [of liquids]". *Lum-a-[n.] Latin has "luma" ("a kind of bramble that grows in meadows"). Protoceltic has *lummo- (adj. "bare, naked"). The meaning is "bramble [name of many medicinal plants]". Derived word: Lum-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T20 - l. 4) "in brambles". M
*M-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "maneo" ("to stay, to remain, to persist, to persevere"). The meaning is "to stay, to remain, to persist, to resist; stay, persistence, perseverance". Derived word: Mâ-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 45.4) "for persistence [resistence]." M-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T35 - l. 1/2) (T33 - l. 6) In T35, "for resistance/resistant". In T33, "for stay". M-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 65.2,3) "for stays/permanences". M-wî - [v. in past tense] (T23 - l. 1) "[?] remained". *Mad-a- [n. or v.] Greek has μαδω [mado] ("pluck, moult"). Latin has "madeo" ("to be wet, humid"). The meaning is "to be wet/humid; humidity". Derived words: Madâ-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T10 l. 5) "in humidities". Mad-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 52.1) "for humidity". Mag-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 12) Protoceltic has *mag-e/o- ("increase"). The meaning is "to increase, to grow; increase, growing". Derived words: Magj-a - [adj.] (T39 - l. 1) Protoceltic has *magjo(adj. "big"). So, "[adj.] "big". Magn-a - [adj. or adv.] (T38 - l. 2) Latin has "magnum" (adv. "very, greatly") and "magnus" (adj. "big, high, excellent, rich, powerfull"). Protoceltic has *maginjāko[Irish]/*magino-[G.B.] ("big") and *Magon- ("great"). The meaning is "[adj.] big, high, excellent, powerfull; [adv.] very". Variation of "meg-a". Magn-e - [adj. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 7) "for big one". Magn-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T20 l. 1) "in big/great". Mag-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T02 - l. 6) "by increases". Meg-a - [n., v. or adj.] (GLO - 49.2) Greek has μεγα [mega] ("big"). Sanskrit has root "mah" ("to worship, to reverence") that origins "mah/mahâ" ("big" = 'who[m] must be worshipped/reverenced'?). There are most ancient vedic forms: "magh > magha, maghâ". Sumerian has "mah" ("to be or become big; high, great, sublime"). The meaning is "to be big/great; magnanimity, importance; big, great". Meg-ê-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T15 - l. 1) "by magnanimities/importances". Mek-at-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T31 - l. 1) According as Greek μεγεθος [megethos] ("greatness")? Did "g" letter in "meg-a" [see GLO - 49.2] became "k" by "sandhi" [euphony rule] because of owing to "t" in sufix "-at-"? Greek has μηκος [mekos] ("length"). Does sufix "-at-" makes nouns of abstract action? The meaning is "greatness". Here, "of greatness". Mak-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 65.2,3) (T14 - l. 3) Greek has μαχη [makhe] ("fight, combat, battle"). Micenic Greek has proper name "Ma-ka-wo" (acc. greek Μαχαων [Makhaon]) originated from μαχη [makhe] ("fight"). Latin has "machaera" ("a kind of short sword; cutlass") and "machaerium" ("cutlass or knife"). Protoceltic has *agro-magos- ("battle-field"). Sanskrit has "mac" [read "match"] ("to cheat, to adore"). The meaning is "to fight, to combat; fight, combat, battle". Derived words: Mak-â [n. + Sing. abl.] (T10 - l. 6) "by fight". Mak-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 45.4) "for battles".
14



Mal-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 64.3) (T26 - l. 2) (T20 - l. 5) (T16 - l. 8) (T02 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *mallo- ("depraved"; "slow"; "member"). Latin has "malum" ("evil, misfortune, disaster, harm" or "apple, any kind of fruit") and adv. "male" ("badly, ill; mis-; in-; little"). Sanskrit has roots "mal/mall" ("to hold; to possess"), "mlêt./mlêd." ("to be bad") and vedic term "mala" ("dirt"). Every notions (depraved, harm, dirt) have connection with we consider something being "evil" or "bad". The meaning is "to hold, to possess, to be possessed [by grave or violent way]; evil, possession [by grave or violent way]". Derived words: Mal-e [n. + Sing. dat.] (T21 - l. 5/6) (T32 - l. 4) (T42 - l. 3) "for evil, for [violent] possession". Mal-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T06 - l. 3/4) (T32 - l. 1) "in evil, in possession [by grave or violent way]". *Malaks-o-[n. or v.] Greek has μαλακος [malakos] (adj. "gentle to, tender, soft"). Latin has "malasso" or "malaxo" ("to make soft, to soften, to mollify"). The meaning is "to soften, to mollify; softening; tender, soft". Derived word: Malakso-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 9) "of softening". *Malew-â-[n. or v.] Compound with "mal- + ew- [instrumental]" meaning "instrument for catch, beat"? Latin has "malleus" ("hammer, mallet, sledge hammer; a kind of instrument for killing victims"). Protoceltic has *malawo- (adj. "soft"). The meaning is "to be soft; [sledge]hammer [for sacrifices]." Derived word: Malew-â-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T25 - l. 2/3) "of [sledge]hammers [for sacrifice]." Mamm-a - [n.] (T28 - l. 1) Protoceltic has *mammā- ("mother"). Greek has μαμα [mama] ("mother"). Latin has "mamma" ("mamma, teat; mother, grandmother or sitter"). Sumerian has "mu10" [and variations "mí, munus"] ("woman; female"). The meaning is "mother". Derived word: Mam-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T17 - l. 7) (T29 - l. 7) Original is "mam-a = mamm-a". Here, "by Mothers". Man-a - [n. or v.] (T24 - l. 5) Greek has μην/μηνος [men/menos] ("month"), μηνυω [menuo] ("to make know, to reveal") and μανα [mana] ("mother"). Protoceltic has *manako- ("information"). The meaning is "to make know, to reveal; revelation, information, month[?]". *Mann-a-[n.] Latin has "mannus" ("knife; little horse that walks very well"). The meaning is "knife". Derived word: Mann-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 65.2,3) "for knife". *Map-a-[n.] Latin has "mapalia" ("huts, shacks, thatched houses, cottages"). The meaning is "hut, shack, cottage". Derived word: Map-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T02 - l. 9) "in huts". Maq[w]-a - [n. or v.] (T22 - l. 5) If glozelic "qopa" [q] is a [qw], so we must read it "maqwa", not "maqa". Protoceltic has *make/o- ("nourish") and *makwo- ("son"). The meaning is "to nourish; food, nourishment; son". Mar-a - [n. or v.] (T35 - l. 3) (T02 - l. 6) Greek has μαραινω [maraino] ("wilt"). Protoceltic has *mar-e/o- ("remain") and *marwo- ("dead"). Sanskrit has roots "må" [read "mri"] ("to die") and "mè" [read "mri"] ("to kill, to hurt") and words "mara/marana" ("death"). The meaning is "to wilt, to die; death". Derived word: Ma-ta - [v. adj.] (T21 - l. 4) (T20 - l. 3) (T14 - l. 1) See T41 - l. 3. Original is "mar-a" [mar- + ta = ma(r)ta/mata]. The meaning is "dead, wilted". Marel-a - [compound n.?] (T29 - l. 9) May be a compound: "mar-a" + "el-a". For "mar-a"See T35 - l. 3. The meaning is "to wilt, to die; death". For "el-a"- See T19 - l. 1. The meaning is "to go, to come along; coming along, advancement". The final meaning is "whose death come along". This is the name of demigod mentioned in text. Masg-a - [n.] (T42 - l. 8) Latin has "mosculus" ("little habit") - the form *moscus may means "the habit". "Habit" may be the meaning. Mat-a - [n. or v.] (T02 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *mat- ("remit"). The meaning is "remit; forgiveness, remission". *Maz-a- [n. or v.] Greek has μαζευω [madzeuo] ("rasie in army, furl, pick up, gather, pick, marsh"). Latin has "mas" ("male"), "massa" ("pastry"), "masso" ("to knead, to thicken"). Sanskrit has
roots "mañ" [read "mash"] ("to kill; to sound"), "mas" ("to measure, to charge for" - "masta" is "measured"). Sumerian has "máš" ("extispicium - divination by entrails of sacrified animal; sacrificial animal; to inspect"). The meaning is "to catch, to kill, to measure, to inspect [sacrify's victim]; sacrificial death, inspection [of victim], extispicium, divination by entrails [of victim]". Derived words: *Maza-ta- [v. adj.] "extispiciated [who had your entrails inspected for divination]". Maza-th-î - [v. adj. + Sing. loc.] (GLO - 49.5) Variation of "maza-t-i". Here, "in [when] extispiciated" or "in [when] entrails being inspected". *Med-a- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *med-e/o ("be able"; "say"; "sin"), *med-o- ("power") and *medu- ("mead"). Sanskrit has roots "mid" ("to love, to be soft, to melt" or "to understand; to kill") and
15



"medh" ("to know; to kill; to find") and words "medha" ("sacrifice, immolation") and "medhâ" ("intelligence, knowledge, wisdom, sagacity; reward, recompense"). The meaning is "to be able, to love, to know, to understand; wisdom, knowledge, intelligence, power". Derived word: Med-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] "by wisdom". *Met-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *met-e/o- ("mow"), *mett- ("lack") and *metto- ("failure"). The meaning is "to mow; harvest, decimation". Derived word: Met-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T07 - l. 4) "of harvests". *Mî-[article] Greek has μια [mia] ("one"). Latin has "mi" (dat. form 'ego' - "for me"; vocative Masc. from sing. of 'meus' - "my"). May be a rare indefinite article: "one/an/a". Derived word: My-â [article + Sing. abl.] (T20 - l. 7) "by one". Mjen-a - [adj. and adv.] (T02 - l. 4/5) Protoceltic has *men-n- ("remain") and *mīno-/*meino-(??) (adj. "thin"). The meaning is "thin; little[?]". Here, "little[?]". *Mîk-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "micans, micantis" (adj. "resplendent, shining") and "mico" ("to to glitter, to shine, to scintillate"). The meaning is "to glitter, to shine, to scintillate; resplendency, scintillation". Derived word: Mîketj-a - [n. or adj.] (T12 - l. 4) The meaning is "resplendent; resplendency". Here, "resplendent". *Mîm-a - [n.] Greek has μιμος [mimos] ("mime") and μιμουμαι [mimoumai] ("imitate, emulate, echo, follow suit"). Latin has "mimus" ("comedian who performs with mime; a kind of jocose poetry") and "Mimas" ("Mimantis, a mountain in Jonia"). May be a proper name - Mîma, or a place. Derived word: Mîm-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T13 - l. 5) "in Mîma". *Mîr-a- [n., v. or adj.] Latin has "mire" (adv. "very well, wonderfully"), "miro" ("to admire"), "mirum" ("marvel, wonder, prodigy, the admirable thing") and "mirus" (adj. "admirable"). The meaning is "to admire; marvel, wonder, admirable thing; admirable". Derived word: Mîre-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T25 - l. 6) "by admirable thing". *Mlat-a-[n., v. or adj.] Greek has μαλθακος [malthakos] (adj. "delicate, indolent, effeminate"). Latin has "maltha" ("a kind of bitumen; wax-varnish used for ancients in order to prepare little writingboards"), "maltho" ("to bituminate with bitumen named malta") and "malthinus" (adj. "soft, delicate, effeminate"). Protoceltic has *mlāti- (adj. "soft") and *mlāto- ("flour"). The meaning is "to be soft/delicate; flour; [adj.] soft, delicate". Derived word: Mlat-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 35.2) "for flour". M-o - [n. or v.] (T43 - l. 4) (T13 - l. 5) Greek has μυω [müo] ("to iniciate"). Latin has "mos" ("habit or way of life; virtue, virtuous habit"). Sanskrit has "mû" ("bond, tie" - from root "mû" - "to bind"). Sumerian has "mu" ("entry"). The meaning is "to enter, to join, to iniciate, to be virtuous; virtue, habit, entry, iniciation". Derived word: M-ô - [v. in imperative form or n. + Pl. gen.] (GLO - 63.3) (T02 - l. 3) "iniciate [enter, become virtuous]/use!" or "of iniciations". *Moy- [pron.] Protoceltic has *moi- (pron. "me, my"). The meaning is "me, my". Derived word: Moy-u-[pron. + Pl. abl.] (T23 - l. 5) "of my". Mol-a - [n. or v.] (T03 - l. 2/3) Protoceltic has *mol-eje/o- ("praise"). The meaning is "to praise; praise". Mon-a - [n. or v.] (T23 - l. 6) Greek has μονη [mone] ("dwelling" or adj. μονος, "only, sole"). Protoceltic has *moni- ("wish") and *mono- ("malice"). The meaning is "to wish; wish, desire". Mor-a - [n.] (T42 - l. 4) Latin has "mora" ("delay, impediment, obstacle"), "moro" ("to delay"), "morus" (adj. "silly, foolish"; "mulberry-tree") and "morum" ("mulberry"). Protoceltic has *mero("mulberry"). The meaning is "mulberry-tree, mulberry". Mot-a - [n. or v.] (T20 - l. 5/6) Latin has "moto" ("to move, to agitate, to move often") and "motus" ("movement, commotion, shake, agitation"). The meaning is "to move, to agitate; movement, agitation". Derived words: Môt-a - [n. or v.] (T32 - l. 4) Variation of "mot-a"? Mot-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T20 l. 3) "of movement". M-u - [n. or v.] (T05 - l. 3) (T36 - l. 2) Greek has μυς/μυος [müs/müos] ("mouse"). Latin has " mu" ("voice or sound of deaf persons; crumb") and "mus" ("mouse"). Sanskrit has root "mus" ("to destroy, to break, to rob"). The meaning is "to destroy, to break, to crumble, to rob; destruction, mouse, thief". Derived word: Mw-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 44.1) "for mice/thieves". *Mutôn-a - [n.] Latin has "muto, mutonis" ("penis") and "mutoniatus" (adj. "who has a big penis"). Protoceltic has *muto- ("penis"). The meaning is "penis". However, may be a god proper name - Mutôna. Derived word: Mutôn-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 11/12) "for Mutôna".
16



GLOZELIC
ETYMOLOGICAL
GLOSSARY
PAULOSTEKEL
(HIEROLINGUIST)
"PakîTeô"["In gods' peace" - in glozelic]
Porto Alegre - 2006.



GLOZELIC ETYMOLOGICAL GLOSSARY
(It contains more than 400 roots and about 600 words in Glozelic language)
(OBS.: [v.] verb; [n.] noun; [adj.] adjective; [adv.] adverb; [prep.] preposition; [conj.] conjuntion; [sing.] singular; [pl.] plural; [nom.] nominative; [gen.] genitive; [dat.] dative; [abl.] ablative; [loc.] locative; [pron.] pronoun; [pos. pron.] possessive pronoun; [Dem. Pron.] demonstrative pronoun; [masc.] masculine; [fem.] feminine; [v. adj.] verbal adjective; [comp. N.] compound noun); [pref.] prefix)
N
Nag-a - [n. or v.] (T29 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *nak-e/o- ("reach"). May be name of original city of supplicant in T29: "Naga" [lit. "attainment"?]. Nal-a - [n. or v.](GLO - 29.6) (T13 - l. 5) (T03 - l. 5) Latin has "Neleus" ("Neptune's son and Flora's husband, the goddess of flowers"). Sanskrit has root "nal" ("to smell; to bind"). May be Nal-a = Nel-eus, "who feels smell", because he is goddess of flowers' husband. The final meaning is "to smell; smell". Derived word: Nal-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T03 - l. 6) "in Nala". Nam - [conj.] (T14 - l. 7) Latin has conj. "nam" ("because, since; in fact"). This is the meaning. Nar-a - [n. or v.] (T03 - l. 9) Protoceltic has *nāro- ("noble"), *nero- ("hero"). Sanskrit has words "nara" ("man") and "narâ" (centaurs: men with human body and equine members"). The meaning is "to be noble; noble". Derived words: Nar-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T33 - l. 4) "in noble". Nar-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T22 - l. 4) "of noble". *Nat-a-[n. or v.] Greek has νηθω [netho] ("to spin, to weave"). Protoceltic has *nat-(j)āje/o("jump, fly") and *natā- ("song"). Sanskrit has root "naö" ("to dance; to act; to sound; to speak"). The meaning is "to jump, to sing; song". Derived word: Nat-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (GLO - 49.5) "in song". *Ne-ê-[n. or v.] Latin has "netus" (adj. "spun"). Protoceltic has *nei-to- ("passion") and *neit-s ("warrior, hero"). The meaning is "to fall in love with; passion". Derived word: Neêt-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T13 - l. 3) "of passion". Nî - [adj.] (GLO - 47.6) According as greek νεος [neos] ("new, fresh; young"). Protoceltic has *newjo- ("new"). In Rig-Veda "nava" (from "nu"?) means "young". However, "nî" means "to lead, to guide". Does it has a connection with youth and commanding force? In Sumerian, "nè" means "strength, vigor, violence", "ní" means "self; body; one's own" and "ne4" means "fear; respect; frightfulness; awe", all these conceptions being connected with youth [in animals or human beings]. Nîwâe - [conj.] (T03 - l.7) Latin has "neve" (conj. "or not, in order to not, nor, neither"). This is the meaning. Nu - [adv.] (T17 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *nu- ("now""). This is the meaning. Nupe - [n.] (T01 - l. 4/5) Original is "nup-a"[?]. Greek has νυφη [nüfe] ("bride"). Latin has "Niphe" ("Nife: Diana's companion"). The meaning is "bride". May be a proper name - "Nupe" [like Latin Niphe] . Here, "Nupe".
Ŏ
Ol-a = *Ôl-a - [adj.] (T08 - l. 5) Greek has 'ολος (adj. "all"). Protoceltic has *ol- ("beyond; says") and *oljo- ("all"). The meaning is "all". *Omaç-a - [n.] Latin has "omasum" ("thickest and fat intestine; grease of intestines"). The meaning is "grease of intestines". Omaç-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 3) "for grease of intestines". *On-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "onus" ("onus, load, burden; expense; inconvenience") and "onustus" (adj. "loaded"). The meaning is "to load, to spend; load, burden, expense". Derived word: Onaç-a - [adj.] (T01 - l. 7) "loaded, heavy". Ooek-a = *Ôek-a - [n.] (T09 - l . 5 - B) Variation of "ôek-a"? Greek has οικος [oikos] ("house, home"). Latin has "oecos" or "oecus" ("room, specially for splendid banquets; house"). The meaning is "room, house, home". *Oot-a=*Ôt-a=*Ôyt-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "otis" ("a kind of bird") and "otus" ("a kind of owl"). Protoceltic has *oito- ("oath"). The meaning is "to take an oath; oath". Derived words: Oot-ô = *Ôt-ô=*Ôyt-ô-[n. + Pl. gen.] (T42 - l. 7) "of oaths". Ôyt-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 6) "for oath". *Op-a- [n.] Greek has οπη [ope] ("aperture, borehole"). Latin has "opa" ("hole in the wall where beam sustains itself"), "opes" ("property, possessions, power, forces"), "ops, opis" ("help, assistance, power, force to help"; adj. "rich, abundant") and "opus" ("work, fashion, artifice"). The meaning is "aperture, [bore]hole". Derived word: Op-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T24 - l. 8) "in aperture".
2



Or-a - [n. or v.] (T09 - l. 3 - A) Latin has "oro" ("to pray, to say a prayer, to ask"), "oratio" ("oration, speech, prayer"), "oratum/oratus" ("petition, supplication, entreaty") and "oratus" (adj. "entreated, who anyone asked"). The meaning is "to pray, to ask, to speak; oration, speech, prayer". Derived words: Or-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T17 - l. 3) "by supplication". Ora-n-a - [adj.] (T17 - l. 5) (T29 l. 5) Like Latin "orans/orantis" (adj. "who asks, entreats"). So, "who asks or entreats, supplicant". *Ora(t)ta-[v. adj.] "asked, entreated". Ora-t-t-î - [v. adj. + Sing. loc.] (T36 - l. 7) "in asked/entreated". *Ow- [n.] Latin has "ovis" ("sheep") and "ovo" ("to triumph walking or in a horse sole; to rejoice"). Ancient Greek has οFις ("ówis" - "sheep"). Protoceltic has *owi- ("sheep"). The meaning is "sheep". Derived words: Ow-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T05 - l. 3) "by sheep". Ow-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T25 l. 3) "in sheep". Ow-û - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T01 - l. 6) "in sheeps". *Oyr-a-[n.] Protoceltic has many words beginning with *oi- . The most connected probably word is *oro-/*or-iro- ("bank"). The meaning is "bank". Derived word: Oyr-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T20 - l. 5) "by banks". *Oz-a - [n.] Latin has "os" ("mouth; face, presence; mouth of a river"). The meaning is "mouth, face, mouth of a river". Derived word: Oz-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T14 - l. 8) "in mouths of rivers". Ozd-a - [n. or v.] (T13 - l. 7) Protoceltic has *ouxto- ("cold"). The meaning is "to cool; cold, ice".
Ō
*Ôd-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "oda" ("song"). The meaning is "to sing; song". Derived word: Ôdâ - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 66.1) (T10 - l. 6) "by song". Ôgn-a - [n.] (T18 - l. 4) Latin has "agnus" ("lamb, male lamb"). Greek has αρνι ["arní"] ("lamb"). Protoceltic has *ogno- ("lamb"). The meaning is "lamb". Ôk-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 45.2) Latin has "occo" ("to harrow ground, to unmake lumps") and "occa" ("harrow to unmake lumps"). Protoceltic has *ok- ("sharpen"). The meaning is "to harrow [ground]", "harrowing [of ground]" or "harrow to unmake lumps". Ôl-o = *Ol-o- [adj. or indef. pron.] (T09 - l. 6 - A) Greek has 'ολος (adj. "all"). Protoceltic has *ol- ("beyond; says") and *oljo- (adj. and indef. pron. "all"). The meaning is "[adj.][pron. indef.] all". Ônd-a - [n.] (T10 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *ondes- ("stone"). The meaning is "stone". P
Pad-e[?] - [n.] (T30 - l. 1) We are not sure about this word, because tablet is truncated. Latin has "pades" ("a kind of resinous tree") and "padus" ("whitish pine tree"). The meaning is "whitish pine tree". Here, "for whitish pine tree". Pag-a - [n.] (T32 - l. 7) (T24 - l. 1) (T17 - l. 4) Latin has "pagus" ("village; villager"). The meaning is "village". Derived words: *Pago-n-a-[n.] "villager". Pago-n-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T17 - l. 3) (T29 - l. 3) "in villager". *Pâgn-a-[n.] May be a proper name - Pâgna. Derived word: Pâgn-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T09 - l. 1 - B) "by Pâgna". Pakh-a = *Pak-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 65.2,3) Latin has "paco" ("to pacify, to placate, to mitigate, to moderate"). Sanskrit has root "pac" [read "patch"] ("to spread, to make clear"). The meaning is "to placate, to appease, to pacify, to moderate; peace, appeasement". Derived word: Pak-î [n. + Sing. loc.] (T03 - l. 5) "in peace". Pal-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 51.3) (T09 - l. 3/4 - A) Latin has "palans" (adj. "vagabond, errant, gone astry"), "Pales" ("goddess of shepherds") and "palla" ("gaulish short mantle"). Sanskrit has roots "pal/pel/phel" ("to go"). Sumerian has "pala(2,3)" ("clothing [of gods and rulers]"). The meaning is "to wander, to go astry; wandering, rambling; errant". Here, it is goddess of shepherds, "Pales" [lit. "wandering, rambling, errant"]. Derived word: Pal-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T42 - l. 4) In T42 - l. 4, word may be "pal-..." ("to wander, to go astry; wandering, rambling; errant"), but may be also "dal-..." ("to break, split, open; part, partition, division"). A possibility, by context is "of errant": "pal-o". *Paler-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "palleo, pallere" ("to be pale"). Greek has παλευω [paleuo] ("wrestle, grapple"). The meaning is "to wrestle, to grapple; wrestle, grapple". Derived word: Paler-e [n. + Sing. dat.] (T13 - l. 1/2) "for wrestling". Pam-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 52.2) (T38 - l. 4/5) (T02 - l. 11) Greek has πομα [poma] ("drink"). Sanskrit has roots "pâ" ("to drink, to feast on, to swallow up"), "pî" ("to drink") and "pâtra" ("vase for drink"). The meaning is "to drink; drink or [vase for] drink". Derived words: Pam-e - [n. + Sing. dat.]
3



(T01 - l. 2) "for drink". Pam-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T26 - l. 2/3) "for drinks". Pam-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T24 - l. 6) "in drink". Pam-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T26 - l. 5) "of drink". Pap-a - [n.] (T01 - l. 8/9) Latin has "papa" ("gruel, pap, boys' food"), "pappas" ("pedagogue, boy's preceptor: Jupiter's epithet"). May be a proper name - Papa - like Latin "Pappas", a Jupiter's epithet. Par-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 8) Greek has παρα [para] ([prep.] "in spite of, despite"). Protoceltic has *φar- ("seek") and *φar(a) ([prep.] [adv.] [conj.] "before"). The meaning is "to seek; search, quest". *Pard-a-[n.] Latin has "pardus" ("leopard, ounce's male"). The meaning is "leopard". Derived word: Pard-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T05 - l. 2) "in leopard". *Pasg-a - [n. or v.] Greek has φασκω [fasko] ("to allege, to assert"), originating φασις ("notice"). Latin has "fascio" ("to swaddle, to tie, to bind") and "pasco" ("to graze, to feed, to eat; to pasture, to nourish"). The meaning is "to allege, to assert, to notice; notice". Derived word: Pasg-wî [v. in past tense] (T42 - l. 1) "it was aleged, asserted, noticed". *Pat-a- [n. or v.] Greek has πατεω [pateo] ("to walk"). Protoceltic has *φed-/*φend-e/o- ("to go"). Sanskrit has roots "pat." ("to go; to speak, to cover"), "pat" ("to fall, to fly, to alight, to sink, to be degraded, to attack; to be master of, to rule, to possess, to be fit for"), "pad" ("to go, to move" infinitive is "patnum"), "panth" ("to go") and "pâtha" ("path"). The word may be evolved from protoindo-european as follows: *pant->*panth->path->pâtha [in Sanskrit] and *pant->*pat-> pat-a/pat-eo[in Glozelic and Greek]. The meaning is "to walk; path". Derived words: Pat-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T13 - l. 7) "by path". Pat-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 29.1) (T03 - l. 9) "for path". Pat-u [n. + Pl. abl.] (T36 - l. 3) "by paths". Path-a - [n. or v.] (T07 - l. 3) Latin has "pathe" ("suffering, perturbation, disarrangement, confusion"). Greek has παθημα [pathema] ("suffering, passion, desire") and παθος ("passion"). The meaning is "to suffer, to disturb; suffering; passion, desire". Paz-a - [n. or v.] (T39 - l. 5/6) (T12 - l. 3) Latin has "passa/passum" ("vine made with raisin grape") and "passus" (adj. "who suffered, bore, dry at sun"). The meaning is "to raise, to become raisin; vine made with raisin grape". *Pekam-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "peccamen=peccatum" ("mistake, error, delict, crime, fault, sin") and "pecco" ("to sin, to fail in obligation"). The meaning is "to sin, to make a mistake/crime/delict, to be guilty; mistake, error, delict, crime, sin, fault". Pekam-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T05 - l. 5/6) "in mistake". *Pên-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "penas, penatis" ("house, dwelling, family"), "penis" ("tail; penis"), "penna" ("feather") and "penus" ("providing [of food]"). Protoceltic has *benā- ("woman"), *bennā("horn"; "wagon") and *φeno-/*φono- ("water"). Sanskrit has root "pan" ("to praise"). Sumerian has "pana" ("bow"). The meaning is "to bow, to praise; reverence, praise". Derived words: *Pên-î-[adj.] "bowed, praised, reverenced". Pêny-e - [adj. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 66.1) "for who is praised". *Peoth-a-[n., v. or adj.] Irish gaelic has "peata" (adj. "pet"). The meaning is "to pet, to be pet; pet". Derived word: Peoth-u - [adj. + Pl. abl.] (T02 - l. 7/8) "by pets". Perî - [conj.] (T36 - l.3/4) Protoceltic has *φeri (conj. "because of") and *φeri- (adv. and prep. "beyond"). The meaning is "because of". Pet-a - [n. or v.] (T25 - l. 4) Greek has πετω [peto] ("fly, throw, dump, hurl, jet"). Protoceltic has *φatano-/*φet-t- ("wing"), *φet-e/o- ("fly") and *φetno-/*φetro- ("bird"). The meaning is "to fly, to throw, to dump, to hurl, to jet; flying, bird". Here, "bird". Derived word: Pet-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T23 - l. 1) "of bird". Pewl-a - [adj. and pron.] (T23 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *φell- ("bury") and *φelu- (adj. and pron. "many"). The meaning is "many, much, very". *Pewot-a-[n.] May be a proper name - Pewota. Derived word: Pewotw-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 7) "of Pewota". Pez-a - [adj.] (T02 - l. 1) (T02 - l. 1/2) Greek has πεζος [pedzos] (adj. "usual, common"). This is the meaning". Pîky-u - [n. or v.] (T02 - l. 2) Greek has πυκνος [püknos] (adj. "thick, dense"). Latin has "pico" ("to pitch, to tar"). The meaning is "to pitch, to tar; pitch, tar, bitumen". Here, "pitch [bitumen]". *Pîmj-a - [adj.] Latin has "phimus" ("vase for luck or dice"). Protoceltic has *φeimi- (adj. "quick"). The meaning is "quick". Derived word: Pîmj-e - [adj. + Sing. dat.] (T31 - l. 3/4) "for who is quick".
4



Pîng-a - [n. or v.] (T43 - l. 3/4) Greek has πινακας [pinakas] ("painting symbol") and πινακιδιον [pinakidion] ("little board for writing"). Latin has "pingo" ("to paint, to portray"). The meaning is "to paint, to put symbol, to write [with symbol]; painting, symbol, wirting [of symbol]". Pîw - [adj.] (T16 - l. 1) Latin has "pius" (adj. "pious, devout, benign, merciful, compassionate"). This is the meaning. *Pôk-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "poculentus" (adj. "potable") and "poculum" ("glass; drink"). The meaning is "to drink; drink, glass". Derived word: Pôk-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (GLO - 44.5) "in drink/glass". *Pom-a-[n.] Latin has "pomum" ("fruit; fructiferous tree"). Protoceltic has *φomonajo- ("oak"). The meaning is "fruit, fructiferous tree; oak". Derived word: Pom-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T28 - l. 3) "in oak". *Pon-a - [n. or v.] Greek has πονος [ponos] ("pain") and πονω [pono] ("hurt, be in pain, ache"). Latin has "pono" (to put, to place, to propose, to suppose; to bury"). Protoceltic has *φono("water"). The meaning is "to hurt; pain". Derived word: Pon-î - [adj.] (T02 - l. 5) "painful". Pon-î-eç-y-o - [compounded n. + Sing. gen.] (T02 - l. 5) Original is "pon-î-eç-a". Compound: "pon-î"+"eç-y-o". For "pon-î" - Original is "pon-a" [See]. The meaning is "painful". For "eç-î" Original is "eç-a". The meaning is "usual". "Eçy-o" means "of usual". The final meaning for "ponîeçyo"is "of that is usually painful". Pôp-a - [n.] (T22 - l. 3) Latin has "popa" ("who sold victims for sacrifices; minister that kills victims in sacrifices; insatiable"). The meaning is "minister of sacrifices". *Pot-a- [n. or v.] Greek has ποθος [pothos] ("lust"), ποτω [poto] ("yearn for"), ποτο [poto] ("drink, brew") and ποτιζω [potidzo] ("ply with, water"). Latin has "Pothos" ("Cupid; desire: jasmintree"), "poto" (to drink [in]") and "potus" ("drink; feast of drinkers"). Protoceltic has *φotlo- ("to drink"). The meaning is "to water, to ply with, to bath; filling up, irrigation, bath". Derived word: Pot-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T03 - l. 7) "of baths". *Pu- [n. or v.] Latin has "purus" (adj. "pure, clean, immaculate, simple") and "purifico" ("to make pure, purify or expiate by any religious ceremony"). Sanskrit has root "pû" ("to purify"). The meaning is "to clean, to clear, to purify; purity, cleanness". Derived words: Pw-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T05 - l. 1) "by purity". Pw-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T03 - l. 6) "for cleanness [purification]". *Pwôl-u- [n.] Protoceltic has *φoulwan- ("ash"). The meaning is "ash, [pl.] ashes". Derived word: Pwôlw-â - [n.] (T17 - l. 6/7) (T29 - l. 6/7) "by [sacred?] ash". Pup-a - [n.] (T05 - l. 2) Latin has "pupa" ("girl, lass; a bird"). The meaning is "girl, lass". Ph = F
Phad-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 50.2, GF 82) Read "fada". Latin has "fata" ("fairy") and "fatum" ("fate, destiny; prediction, oracle"). Greek has φειδομαι [feidomai] ("spare"). Protoceltic has *φed- ("to go"), *φedo-m ("period") and *φodjo- ("journey"). Sanskrit has root "pâ" ("to protect; to rule; to preserve"). Sumerian has "pàd, pà" ("to show, reveal; to choose, call; to seek; to find; to declare; to swear, take an oath"). The meaning is "to predict, to reveal, to declare; prediction, revelation, declaration". Phag-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 51.3) According as infinitive of Greek v. φαγειν [fagein] ("to eat") and n. φαγος [fagos] ("glutton"). Protoceltic has *φit-e/o- ("eat") and *φ(e)ku- ("cattle"). The meaning is "to eat; food". Here, celtic god "Fagus"[lit. "food"]? Q
*Qas-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "quasso" ("to shake, to agitate, to move with violence, to start; to break"). The meaning is "to shake, to agitate, to move with violence; shake, agitation, violent movement". Derived word: Qase-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T01 - l. 12) "by violent movements". *Qwum(a)- [adv.] Latin has "quum=cum" (adv. "when"). The meaning is "when". Derived word: Qwum-e - [adv. + Sing. dat.] (T17 - l. 4/5) (T29 - l. 4/5) "for when, for the moment when". R
*Râçîk-[n.] May be a proper name - "Râçîk"[a god?]. Derived word: Râçîk-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T05 - l. 2) "by Râçîk". *Rad-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "radio" ("to radiate, to glitter"). Protoceltic has *rād-(e)je/o- ("to speak") and *rād-(je/o) ("to think"). Sanskrit has root "râdh" ("to grow, to be ready, to be favourable, to look to the welfare of") and "râdhâ" ("beauty, brightness" - from "râj" - "to shine"). The meaning is "to
5



speak, to think, to glitter, to be favourable, to look to welfare of; thought, beauty, brightness, favour, propitiation". Derived word: Rad-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T28 - l. 4) "in propitiation". Râdr-a - [n. or v.] (T41 - l. 3) Latin has "rado/radere" ("to rasp, to scrape, to stripe"). The meaning is "to rasp, to scrape, to stripe; stroke, rasping, scraping". *Rak-a- [n. or v.] Greek has ραχη [rakhe] ("backboard"). Latin has "racco" ("to snarl like a tiger"). The meaning is "to dash against the poop of, to repel; backboard". Derived words: *Rake-ta[v. adj.] "repeled". Rake-t-î - [v. adj. + Sing. loc.] (T23 - l. 6/7) "in repeled". *Ral-a- [n. or v.] Greek has ραλλυ [rallu] ("rally"). Latin has "rallum" ("iron in plughman's goad in order to clean plough"). The meaning is "to rally, to mixture; rally, mixture". Derived word: Ral-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T37 - l. 3/4) "for mixture". *Ramal-a - [n.] Latin has "ramale" ("boughs, branches, withered bough"). The meaning is "[withered] bough". Derived word: Ramal-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T14 - l. 1) "for [withered] bough". *Rap-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "rapio" ("to carry off, to enrapture, to carry away by violence"). The meaning is "to carry off, to enrapture, to carry away by violence; rapture". Derived words: *Rap-î -[adj.] "ravishing/ravisher". Rapy-â - [adj. + Sing. abl.] (T12 - l. 4) "by ravishing/ravisher". *Rapînna - [n. or v.] Latin has "rapina" ("rapine"). The meaning is "to rapine; rapine [theft or robbery by violence]". Rapînn-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T07 - l. 5) "by rapine". Ras-a - [n. or v.] (T06 - l. 5) Sanskrit has "rasa" ("taste, flavour, desire, affection" - from "ras" - "to taste, to relish, to love"). The meaning is "to love; taste, flavour, desire, love". Rat-a - [n. or v.] (T23 - l. 7) (T32 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *rato- ("favour") and *rātjo-/*rāto("run"). The meaning is "to favour, to make a favour; favour". *Reg-a-[n. or v.] Greek has ρηγας [regas] ("king [lit. 'regent']"). Latin has "rego" ("to rule, to govern, to administer"). Protoceltic has *reg-e/o- ("extend") and *rego- ("band"). The meaning is "to rule, to govern; king". Derived word: Reg-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 3) "for king". Reyd-a - [n. or v.] (T12 - l. 5) Protoceltic has *reidā- ("vehicle"), *reid-e/o- ("travel") and *reidi(adj. "free"). The meaning is "to travel, to move, to walk; vehicle". Reyl-a - [adj.] (T02 - l. 8) Protoceltic has *reilo- (adj. "bright"). This is the meaning. *Reypj-a- [n.] Protoceltic has *reipp-e/o- ("tear"). May be a place name - Reypja. Derived word: Reypj-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T01 - l. 7) "from Reypja". Rek-a - [adj.] (T35 - l. 4) Greek has ρηγας [regas] ("king") and ρηχος [rekhos] (adj. "shallow"). The meaning is "shallow". *Respoç-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "responsio" ("answer, reply") and "responso" ("to reply with insolence; to answer, to reply; to oppose"). The meaning is "to answer, to reply; answer, reply". Derived word: Respoç-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T01 - l. 10/11) "in answer". Ret-a - [n. or v.] (T30 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *rīto(s)- ("seed"). Latin has "retae" ("trees in edge of rivers"). Sanskrit has root "åt" [read "rit"] ("to reproach, to pity, to go, to rival; to have power") and words "retana" ("virile seed") and "retra" ("virile seed, nectar, ambrosia"). The meaning is "to have power; power, virile seed". *Ryet-a-[n.] May be Glozelic name for Rhaetia. Derived word: Ryet-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T31 - l. 4) Latin has "Rhaeti, Rheti, Raeti, Reti" ("Rhetians, inhabitants from Rhaetia"). Protoceltic has *rito("wheel"). Here, "in Rhaetia". *Rîg-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *reg-e/o- ("extend"). The meaning is "to extend; extension, increase". In compound "âti-rig-i" Protoceltic has *ati-reg-V- ("return"). Derived word: Rîg-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T28 - l. 5/6) The expression "tikê âti-rigi" means "for return to kingly/royal domains". Rîm-a - [n. or v.] (T11 - l. 2/3) (T09 - l. 5 - A) Protoceltic has *rīmā- ("number") and *rīm-e/o ("count"). The meaning is "to count; number, enumeration". Derived word: Rîm-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T14 - l. 2) "for number/enumeration". *Ro-e-[n. or v.] Greek has ροη [roe] ("flow"). Protoceltic has *rowes- ("field"). The meaning is "field". Derived word: Ro-e-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T21 - l. 4) "for fields". *Rog-a- [v.] Latin has "rogatio" ("entreaty, request, supplication"), "rogatum" ("interrogation, question, interrogatory"), "rogatus" (adj. "entreated, requested") and "rogo" ("to entreat, to request, to supplicate"). Protoceltic has *rog- ("choose"). The meaning is "to entrat, to request, to supplicate". Derived words: *Rogâ-tî-[n.] "entreaty, request, supplication". Rogâ-ty-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T19 - l. 5/6) "in entreaty/supplication". Rom-a - [n.] (T17 - l. 6) May be the known city of "Rome", main city of Romans.
6



*Runk-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "runca" ("weeding-tool, [weeding] hoe") and "runco" ("to weed, to rake, to harrow, to pull coat out"). The meaning is "to weed, to rake, to harrow; weeding-tool, [weeding] hoe". Derived word: Runk-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T38 - l. 3/4) "in weeding-tool/weeding hoe". *Rup-a-[n.] Latin has "rupes" ("[large] rock, cliff; precipice, defile") and "rupi-" (adj. "wild"). The meaning is "rock, cliff, precipice". Derived word: Rup-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T44 - l. 3) "by cliff". S
Sad-a - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *sād-eje/o- ("dive"), *sadī- ("hilt") and *sādo- (adj. "easy, quiet"). The meaning is "to dive, to put on; hilt, dagger". *Sal-u-[n. or v.] Latin has "Salus" ("goddess in Rome; health"), "salve" (adv. "healthy"), "salvo" ("to save, to conserve, to preserve") and "salveo" ("to be saved, to have health, to be good/well"). Sanskrit has roots "çal/sal" ("to go, to move"). The meaning is "to save, to conserve, to preserve; health, conservation, preservation". Derived word: Sal-w-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] "for preservation". Sam-a - [n. or v.] (T20 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *sāmo ("rest"). Sanskrit has roots "sam" ("to be compounded" or "change form") and "sâm" ("to conciliate, to console"). The meaning is "to rest, to change form; rest, change form [in death]". Derived word: Sam-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T11 - l. 4/5) "in rests". Sap-a - [n. or v.] (T02 - l. 10) Greek has σαπιζω [sapidzo] ("rot, decompose, decay") and σαφης [safes] (adj. "lucid, explicit, unambiguous, definite"). Latin has "sapa" ("a kind of must vine; fruit syrup or pickles; sap, or juice"). The meaning is "to season with must vine; must vine". Sat-a - [n. or v.] (T37 - l. 3) Protoceltic has *satā- ("seed") and *sāti- ("saturation"). Latin has "sata/satorum" ("sown places, seedings, harvests") and "satus" (adj. "sown, planted; to generated, born, produced"). Sanskrit has root "satr" ("to extend, to spread"). The meaning is "to extend, to spread, to seed; seed". Derived words: *Sat-î - [adj.] "sown, generated, produced". Sat-y-u - [adj. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 53.4) "by generated ones [produced ones]". *Sd-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *sadī- ("hilt") and *said- ("achieve"). Sanskrit has roots "sad" ("to divide, to break, to go, to wither, to despond, to be weary") and "sûd" ("to distil, to strike, to hurt, to destroy, to deposit"). Sumerian has "sed(4,5,6)" ("to be calmed, quieted; to pacify; to abate, subside"). The meaning is "to hurt, to destroy, to pacify, to abate; wound, destruction, reduction, breaking". Derived word: Sd-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 44.1) "by reductions/breakings". *Sem-o(w)- [n.] Latin has "Semo, Semonis/Semones" ("the Semones were gods of fields, deified heroes, medium between supreme and lowest gods"). Protoceltic has *sem-e/o- ("pour out"). The meaning is "demigod, medial god, deified hero". Derived words: Sem-ow-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T17 - l. 8/9) "for demigod". Soem-o = *Sem-o- (T29 - l. 8) "of demigod". *Sg-a - [n. or v.] Greek has σκοτος [skotos] ("darkness, obscurity"). Protoceltic has *skalī/*skāto- ("shadow"). Sanskrit has roots "sag" ("to cover"), "skambh" ("to obstruct, to stop") and "sku" ("to go by leaps, to cover, to raise"). Sumerian has "sug4" [and variations "sù; su"] ("to empty; empty, destitute"). The meaning is "to obstruct, to cover, to empty; darkness, void". Derived words: Sg-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T03 - l. 5/6) "for darkness". Sg-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (GLO - 50.1) "of darkness". Sgam-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 5) Protoceltic has *skamano- ("light"). Latin has "scamma" ("area or place where athletes practised"). The meaning may be "to illuminate, to light; light". *Sîd-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *sido- ("stag"). The meaning is "stag". Derived word: Sîd-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 66.1) The compound "dâlagside" in GLO - 66.1 means "in order to possess stag". Sîkar-a - [n.] (T26 - l. 3/4) Latin has "sicaria" ("wallet; saddlebag") and "sicarius" ("killer, who killed with dagger"). The meaning is "wallet, saddlebag". *Sîl-u - [n. or v.] Latin has "silva" ("wood, coppice, forest, jungle, bush; trees; firewood, timber; heap, multitude") and "silvesco" ("to become wood, to become unfruitful tree"). Protoceltic has *selwā- ("wealth, property, possessions, powers"). The meaning is "to become wood, to become unfruitful tree; wood, coppice, forest, firewood, heap, multitude". Derived word: Sîlw-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T44 - l. 4/5) "for forest". Sît-a - [n.] (T21 - l. 3) Protoceltic has *siti- ("long"). Greek has σιτος [sitos] ("wheat") and Micenic Greek has "si-to" ("wheat"). Latin has "sitanion" ("a kind of wheat, sown in March") and "sitonia" ("intendancy of provisions"). The meaning is "wheat". Sî-w - [conj.] (T27 - l. 2) Latin has "sive" (conj. "and if, or if"). Protoceltic has *sjo- (dem. pron. "this[?]"). The meaning is "[conj.] and if, or if, if".
7



*Snî- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has words *snātjo-/*snā-to- ("thread"), *snije/o- ("spin, braid") and *snīmā- ("spinning"), all of them probably originated from *snā-/*snī- meaning "to thread; to make way; to spin". This is the meaning. Derived words: *Snî-t-a-[v. adj.] May be a god name meaning "who make ways". We can identify "Snîta" like greek-roman Hermes/Mercury, because this god, originally, was a phallic god, connected with fertility and good luck, patron of roads and boundaries. Snî-t-â - [v. adj. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 49.2) "by Snita".
SP
Sp-a - [n. or v.] (T05 - l. 5) (T02 - l. 10) Latin has "spargo" ("to spread"). Greek has σπαζω [spadzo] ("break, crack, fracture, smash"). Protoceltic has *sφaro- ("insult"). Sanskrit has root "sphar" ("to tremble, to move"). The meaning is "to spread, to break, to crack, to insult; spreading, insult, crack". Derived word: Spâ-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T41 - l. 4) "for spreading". *Spad-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "spado" ("eunuch, castred"). Sanskrit has roots "çap" [read
"shap"] ("to curse, to imprecate, to swear" - "çapta" is "cursed") and "spaç" [read "spash"] ("to obstruct, to touch, to perceive clearly, to undertake, to string together") and "sphaö" ("to burst, to break out; to blow up; to split, to break, to divide"). The meaning is "to curse, to obstruct, to burst, to break out, to castrate; cursed, eunuch, castred". Derived word: Spad-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T40 l. 3) "of cursed [eunuch]". *Spar-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "sparus/sparum" ("a kind of spear or skyrocket; swordfish"). Protoceltic has *sφāro- ("insult"). The meaning is "to insult; insult, spear[?]". Derived word: Spar-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T14 - l. 5) "in insult". *Spî- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *sφījono- ("flower"). Latin has "spes, spei" ("hope; dread, fear; Spes: goddess"). The meaning is "to hope; hope". Derived word: Spîy-e - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 9) "for hope". *Sput(j)-a- [n. or v.] Latin has "sputo" ("to spit often") and "sputum" ("spittle, saliva"). The meaning is "to spit; spittle, saliva". Derived word: Sputj-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T27 - l. 4) "of spittle/saliva".
T
Ta- - [dem. pron.] (T06 - l. 2) Protoceltic has pron. *to- (the meaning is unknown - may be demonstrative). Latin has adj. "talis" ("similar, like; such") like dem. pron. instead of "hic" ("this"). Sumerian "ta" means "nature, character", but is prep. too ("from; to; for; by means of"). According as Sanskrit pattern (ta, ta-d, ta-m, te, etc.), "ta" is sing. dem. pron. "this; that". Tâ - [pron. 3a pl. nom.] (T14 - l. 5) Pron. "they", according as Sanskrit "ta" ("this; that"). Derived words: Tâ-e - [pron. 3a pl. + Sing. dat.] (T11 - l. 3) "for them". Tâ-î - [pron. 3a Pl. masc.] (T27 - l. 5) "in them". *Tad-a - [n. or v.] Sanskrit has root "tad." ("to strike, to beat, to play upon a musical instrument, to speak"). Sumerian has "túd" ("to spank; to cane"). The meaning is "to strike, to beat; beating, stroke". Derived word: Tad-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 63.3) (GLO - 66.1) (T07 - l. 4) "by stroke". Tag-a - [n., v. or adj.] (GLO - 29.6) (GLO - 51.4, GF 84) (T13 - l. 6) (T01 - l. 9) Protoceltic has *teki-/*togi- ("pleasant"). Latin has "tago" (var. of "tango" - "to touch, to grope; to steal; to like, to taste"). Sumerian has "taka" [and var. "taga", "tak", "tag", "tà"] ("to touch, handle, hold, catch; to hunt"). The meaning is "to touch, to taste, to like; touch, proof, taste; pleasant". In T01, "to please". Derived words: Tag-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T14 - l. 8) "for touch". Tag-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T19 - l. 4) "of taste". Tâj-a - [n. or v.] (T13 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *tā-je/o- ("thaw"). The meaning is "to thaw; thaw". Tak-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 52.6) Protoceltic has *tak- ("strangle"). In Sanskrit, root "tak" means "to laugh at; to bear, to fly or rush upon"; "tik" means "to go or to move"; "tîk" means "to go"; "tik/tig" means "to assail, to go, to seek, to injure or kill, to challenge". The final meaning is "to strangle; strangling; strangler". "Taka" may be the name for "bobbins" found in Glozel; they could be strangling objects. Derived words: Tak-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (GLO - 44.5) "for stranglers". Takî-ta - [v. adj.] (T32 - l. 5) "strangled". Takj-a - [n. or v.] (T01 - l. 4) Variation of "tak-a". Takh-a - [n. or v.] (T19 - l. 5) Greek has ταχα [takha] (adv. "supposedly"). Latin has "taceo" ("to conceal, to shut up"). The meaning is "to conceal, to shut up; silence". *Taks-âe-[n.] Latin has "taxea" ("bacon"). The meaning is "bacon". Derived word: Taksâeâ - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T05 - l. 3/4) "by bacon".
8



Tal-a - [n. or v.] (T16 - l. 4/5) Protoceltic has *tal- ("take") and *tal-e/o ("pay"). Sanskrit has root "tal" ("to be full or complete, to fix, to establish"). The meaning is "to take, to establish, to fix, to pay; payment, something established or fixed". Derived word: Tal-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T15 - l. 4/5) "in payment". *Talam-a-[n. or v.] Greek has θαλαμη [thalame] ("nest, chamber") and θαλαμος [thalamos] ("chamber, ward, booth"). The meaning is "to guard, to have in custody; nest, chamber, guard, custody". Derived word: Talam-î - [n. + Sign. loc.] (T06 - l. 2) "in chamber/nest". Tam-a - [n. or v.] (T07 - l. 2/3) (T23 - l. 5) (T01 - l. 8) Latin has "tama" ("swelling in legs because of walking too much") and "tamus" [var. of "tamnus/taminea"] ("grape-of-dog: plant in which snakes to hide themselves"). Protoceltic has *tam-e/o- ("die"). Sanskrit has "tam" ("to desire, to be fatigued") and "tamas" ("darkness" - from root "tam" - "to suffocate, to faint"). The meaning is "to faint, to fatigue, to die; fainting, fatigue, death." Derived words: Tam-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T33 - l. 2) "for fainting/fatigue/death". Tam-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T17 - l. 1) (T29 - l. 1) "of death". Tam-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) "by faintings". Tham-a - [n. or v.] (T21 - l. 2/3) Var. of "tam-a". Tam-al-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 64.2) Protoceltic has *temelo- ("darkness") and *temeno- (adj. "dark"). Vedic Sanskrit has "tamas" ("darkness" - from "tam", "to suffocate, to faint"). The meaning is "to darken, to suffocate; darkness; dark". Here, "darkness". Derived word: Tam-al-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T42 - l. 2) "of darkness". *Tan-a-[n.] Protoceltic has *tanā- ("time"). This is the meaning. Derived words: Tan-ây - [n. + Pl. nom.] (T29 - l. 5/6) "the times"or a proper name. Tan-o-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T25 - l. 1) "of time". Taqw-a - [n. or v.] (T17 - l. 5) May be variation of an older "takw-a" and an original "tak-a". See GLO - 52.6. The meaning is "to strangle; strangling; strangler". May be a proper name. *Tar(a)d-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "tardo" ("to retard, to detain, to delay; to stop, to linger") and "tardus" (adj. "late, lazy, slow, tardy; obtuse"). Protoceltic has *tardo- ("issue, flow"). The meaning is "to issue, to flow; start, setting out, fluency". Derived words: Tar(a)d-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T39 - l. 1/2) "in start". Tar(a)d-u - [n. + Pl. abl. Pl.] (T35 - l. 3/4) "by starts [incursions?]". T(a)râg-a - [n.] (T10 - l. 4/5) Protoceltic has *trāg-je/o- ("pull"). Latin has "tragos/tragus" ("a kind of herb like a scorpion tail; class of hard and rough sponge"). The meaning is "the t(a)râga [herb]". Tas-a - [n., v. or adj.] (GLO - 51.3) Greek has ταση [tase] ("tendency, potencial, trend, inclination"). Latin has "tasis" ("change in voice"). Sanskrit has root "tas" ("to fade away, to become exhausted" - infinitive is "tasitum"). The meaning is "to be exhausted; exhaustion; exhaust, exhaustive". *Tat-a - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *tato/*tata ("father"). Latin has "tata" ("word used by children for call father; children's preceptor"). Sanskrit has vedic words "tâta" ("father") and "tâtya" ("fatherly"). The meaning is "to care for, to look after, to be father [guard of sacred things]; father [or guard of sacred things]". Derived words: Tatâ-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T37 - l. 1) "by fathers". Tat-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) (GLO - 49.5) "of fathers [or guards of sacred things]". Taz-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 44.1) (T02 - l. 2) Greek has ταζω [tadzo] ("vow"). Latin has "taxo" ("to touch often, to note, to reprehend"). The meaning is "to vow; vow." Derived word: Tâz-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T17 - l. 2) (T29 - l. 2) "for vow". *Ted-a-[n.] Latin has "teda/taeda" ("a kind of tree that produces resin; billet or torch made with this tree"). The meaning is "a kind of tree named 'teda'; billet or torch made with this tree". Derived word: Ted-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T12 - l. 2/3) "for [Teda's] billet". Tel-a - [n.] (T15 - l. 3) (T18 - l. 4/5) Latin has "tela" ("web, thread, warping"), "Tellus" ("Earth, deity; earth; building's pavement; region, land") and "telum" ("spear, dart, arrow or any kind of throw weapon"). Protoceltic has *tela-mon- ("earth"). The meaning is "Earth [deity], earth, region, land". Derived words: Tel-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T19 - l. 6/7) "by Earth". *Telam-a-[n.] "Earth". Telam-î [n. + Sing. loc.] (T27 - l. 1) "in Earth". *Tem-a-[n.] Latin has "temo" ("helm or rudder of plough or small cart; hand-cart's rod; helm of cart's Bootes [constelation]"). The meaning is "helm, rudder, rod". Derived word: Tem-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T12 - l. 6) "of helm". Te-o - [masc. n. or v.] According as Greek θεος [Theos] ("God") and Micenic Greek "te-o-i" ("gods"). Protoceltic has *deiwo-/*desos- ("god"). Latin has "Deus" ("God"). Sanskrit has rooots "dê" ("to protect"), "dai" ("to purify"), "div" ("to wish; to bright, to praise") and words "dêva" ("celestial, a god") and "div/dî" ("bright"). Sumerian has "da" ("to hold; to be near; to protect"), "di" ("to judge, decide; to
9



conduct oneself; to go; to escape") and "du" ("to walk; to go; to come"). The word "god" has notions as "protection, purity, bright, praise, judgement", notions connected with gods of many cultures, including not indo-europeans. In fact, a definition for "god", according as comparisons above has three kinds of aspects: FEATURES (purity, bright - so "celestial=bright" in Sanskrit), FUNCTIONS (protection, realization of desires, judgement) and CULT (worship). The final meaning is "to praise; god, deity". Derived words: Te-e-î - [masc. n. + Sing. loc.] (T40 - l. 2) May be variation of "tê-i", meaning "in god". "Te-â-i" may be fem. form ["in goddess"]. Te-u - [masc. n. + Pl. abl.] (T22 - l. 2 and 4) From "teo+u=teu". It means "by gods". Te-wî - [v. in past tense] (T28 - l. 2/3) "[?] praised". Tet-a - [n.] (T01 - l. 2/3) May be deity name - Teta. Tez-a - [n. or v.] (T09 - l. 3 - B) Greek has τεζαρω [tedzaro] ("stretch, die"). The meaning may be "to stretch, to die; stretching, death". *Tîk-a-[n. or v.] Greek has τειχος [teikhos] ("wall, battlement"). Latin has "tichobates" ("who rises to top of the wall"). Protoceltic has *tigern-āko- (adj. "royal") and *tigern-atsu- ("kingdom"). The meaning is "to dominate, to reign; royal domain, kingdom". Derived word: Tîk-ê - [n. + Pl. dat.] (T28 - l. 4/5) "for royal domains". Tîm-a - [n. or v.] (T37 - l. 5) (T34 - l. 1) Greek has τιμαω [timao] ("to honour, to respect, to venerate"). Latin has "timeo" ("to dread, to fear") and "timor" ("dread, fear, fright, terror; respect, reverence about sacred things; Timor: deity"). Protoceltic has *temelo- ("darkness"). The meaning is "to honour, to respect, to venerate, to dread; respect, veneration, reverence, dread". Here, may be a god name - Tîma. Tîp-a - [n.] (T16 - l. 1/2) Greek has τυπος [tüpos] ("fellow, version, sort, formula, guy"). Latin has "typhus" ("vanity") and "typus" ("mould, pattern, form, shape, portrait, model, copy"). The meaning is "type, pattern, class, mould, form, shape". *Tîpîz - [n.] Latin has "Tiphys" ("Argonauts' pilot, a famous builder of ships"). May be a proper or place name - Tîpîz. Derived word: Tîpîz-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T13 - l. 3/4) "in Tîpîz". *Tît-a- [n.] Latin has "titio" ("firebrand") and "titus" ("wild dove"). The meaning is "[wild] dove". Derived word: Tît-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T34 - l. 6) "in [wild] dove". Tîz-a - [n.] (T14 - l. 3) Latin has "thysias" ("bacchante; bacchante's clamour"). The meaning may be "bacchante". Tô - [adv.] (T16 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *to (adv. "yes"). This is the meaning. Tôg-a - [n. or v.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) Latin has "toga" ("Roman toga, dressed in times of peace; peace; wrapper, cover"). Protoceltic has *tog-eje/o- ("to cover, to protect") and *togo- ("cover, protection"). The meaning is "to cover, to protect; cover, protection, wrapper". *Tôks-a-[n. or v.] Greek has ταξις [taksis] ("order, turn, succession [of priests]") and ταξος [taksos] (bot. "yew: tree"). Latin has "taxus" (bot. "yew: tree"). Protoceltic has *taxsi- ("soft"). The meaning is "to be into order; order, succession, hierarchy". Derived word: Tôks-e-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T06 - l. 5/6) "of order". *Tôm-a- [n. or v.] Greek has τομεας [tomeas] ("field, realm") and τομη [tome] ("section"). Latin has "tome" ("caesura, division") and "tomus" ("tome, volume"). The meaning is "to divide, to section; field, realm, section, division". Derived words: Tôm-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T18 - l. 2/3) "for field [=realm]". Tôm-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T02 - l. 10) "in field". Tuyo - [pron. and correlative adj.] (T31 - l. 5) According as Greek pron. and correlative adj. τοιουτος [toioutos] ("such, like; similar, as"). Protoceltic has *towo- ("your"). The meaning is "similar, like, such, as". Here, "similar". Tug-a - [n.] (T29 - l. 4) Protoceltic has *tougā- ("axe") and *tu-gus-e/o- ("choose"). The meaning is "axe". Tuk-a - [n. or v.] (T04 - l. 4) Greek has τυχη [tükhe] ("chance, luck, fortunes"). Latin has "tuca" ("dainties for seasoning soup"). The meaning is "to have chance/luck/fortune; chance, luck, fortune". Tup-a - [n.] (GLO - 42.4) According as Greek τυπτω [tüpto] ("to beat, to treat ill; to hurt") or τυφομαι [tüfomai] ("to smoke"). Sansrit root "tup", "tump", "tumph", "tuph" or "tubh" means "to hurt, to insult or to kill". Sumerian "tu" means "to interfere" and "tub" or "tun" means "to constrict; to defeat; to massacre". The final meaning is "to hurt, to wound, to defeat; wound, defeat".
10



Tut-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "tute/tuto" (adv. "securely, safely, without danger/fear") and "tuto/tutor" ("to defend, to protect, to guard; to separate, to drive away, to remove"). Sanskrit has "tuttha" ("fire"). The meaning is "to defend, to protect, to guard; defence, protection, tutelage". Ŭ=W
Wâ - [pron. 2a pl.] (GLO - 35.2) (T35 - l. 6) Latin has "vos" ("you - 2a pl."). Sanskrit has monosyllabic forms "vâm" (dual "both you, for both you, of both you") and "vaù" (pl. "you, for you, of you"). The meaning is "you". In GLO - 35.2, the meaning is "your". *We- [n. or v.] Latin has "veho" ("to bring, to carry, to conduct"). Protoceltic has *wej-e/o("fence in"), *wod-eje/o- and *ber-e/o- ("lead, bring"). Sanskrit has roots "vay" ("to go; to move") and "vî" ("to persecute, to pursue, to seek, to search"). The meaning is "to bring, to carry, to search, to seek; search, quest, carriage, conveyance". Derived word: Weu - [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 55) "by carriages". Wed-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 44.1) Latin has "vado" ("to go, to walk, to pass, to run") and "Vedius" ("Pluto, god of hell"). Protoceltic has *wed-e/o- ("lead") and *weid- ("know"). Sanskrit has root "vid" ("to know; to learn; to find out; to consider; to be; to exist; to get; to obtain; to find; to discuss; to reason up; to understand; to feel; to experience; to tell; to dwell") and words "vadh" ("to beat, to strike"), "veda" ("[sacred] knowledge") and "vidha" ("division"). Sumerian has "ud" ("sun, light, day; time; weather; storm [demion]"). "Weda" may be name for a god very similar to Roman Pluto. The meaning is [Lit.] "to know, to understand, to lead; knowledge, leadership; guide, leader". Weyr-a - [adj.] (T23 - l. 6) Protoceltic has *weiro- (adj. "crooked"). This is the meaning. The expression "moyu mona weyra" in T23 means "of my crooked desires". *Wel-a-[n. or v.] Latin has "velo" ("to cover with a veil, to cover, to dress; to adorn; to hide"). Protoceltic has *wali- ("cover"), *-walo- ("powerful"), *wal-o- ("leader") and *wel-e/o- ("see"). Sanskrit has roots "val" ("to cover; to move"), "vall" ("to be covered; to go; to move"), "vel/vell" ("to go, to move; to shake, to agitate; to tremble") and "vil" ("to cover; to hide; to jet"). The meaning is "to cover, to veil, to hide; cover, veil". Derived word: Wel-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T43 - l. 2) "for veil". Wet-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 49.5) (T26 - l. 1) Latin has "veto" ("to forbid, to prohibit"). Sanskrit has roots "ve" ("to weave, to sew, to compose"), "veth" ("to beg, to ask") and "vye" ("to cover, to veil" "vâta" é "veiled, covered"). The meaning is "to cover, to veil, to forbid, to prohibit; veil, prohibition, cover". Derived word: Wet-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T09 - l. 4 - B) "of prohibition". *Wî-[n.] Protoceltic has *wi- ("song"). The meaning is "song, chant". Derived words: Wy-e [n. + Sing. dat.] (T14 - l. 5) "for song". Ûî- [n.] (T11 - l. 4) Variation of "wî". In T11, it forms compound ["ûî-sam-a" = "repose song" or "funeral song"]. *Wîd-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *widā- ("sight") and *widu- ("wood"). The meaning is "to see; sight". Derived word: Wîd-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 44.5) "by sight". *Wîg-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "vigeo" ("to have vigour/force, to be robust, to be able, to flourish"). Protoceltic has *wik-e/o- ("fight"). The meaning is "to have vigour/force, to be robust, to be able, to fight; vigour, force, power, fight". Derived word: Wîge-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T36 - l. 7) "of vigour". *Wîyt-a- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *wīto- ("feast"). The meaning is "to feast; feast". Derived word: Wîyt-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T36 - l. 4/5) "of feasts". Wîl-a - [n. or v.] (T27 - l. 5) (T26 - l. 2) Latin has "vilis" [read "wilis"] (adj. "cheap, vile, contemptible"), "vileo" ("to become cheap") and "villus" ("shag, coat of animals"). The meaning is "to become cheap or contemptible; vileness, contempt; vile, contemptible". *Wîs-a - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *wīso- ("poison"). The meaning is "to poison; poison, venom". The meaning is "to poison; poison, venom". Derived word: Wîs-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (*GLO - ?, 984.2.181) The compound "tôgwisi" in *GLO - ?, 984.2.181 means "in protection against poison". Uk-a = Uq-a - [n. or v.] (T16 - l. 9) (T17 - l. 3) (T29 - l. 3) Latin has "vaco" ("to be vacant/empty, to lack"). Protoceltic has *wako- ("empty"). Sanskrit has root "ujjh" ("to abandon; to leave"). Sumerian has "ukum" ("dust"), "uku2,5" ("poor man; poverty; to be or become poor"). The meaning is "to be vacant, to be poor; empty, poverty". Derived words: Uk-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO 53.4) "by empty/poverty". Uk-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (GLO - 66.1) (T19 - l. 4/5) "for poverty". Ûk-a - [v. in imperative form] (GLO - 65.2,3) "empty!". Ul-a - [adj.] (T18 - l. 2) According as Latin "ullus" (adj. "some, any[thing]; one, one or another"). Derived words: Ul-î - [adj. + Sing. loc.] (T15 - l. 2) "in anyone[?]".Ûl-a - [adj.] (T04 - l. 1) Variation of "ul-a".
11



Um-a - [adv.] (T40 - l. 1) (T25 - l. 3) (T33 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *uman (adv. "here"). Sanskrit has "umâ" ("light"). The meaning is "here".
Ū
*Û- [n. or v.] According as Greek ους/ωτος [ous/otos] and αυτι [auti] ("ear"). Sanskrit has root "av" ("to hear, to act, to wish"). The word "avita" ("heard, wished") also may be "ûta", similar to Latin "datus" ("dado"). The meaning is "to hear/wish; hearing, wish". Derived words: Ôu-ta = Û-ta [v. adj.] (T11 - l. 1) "heard". Ut-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 29.5) (T32 - l. 1) Variation of "Û-ta". Ut-ô - [n. + Pl. gen.] (T12 - l. 3) "of listenings". Ût-a - [v. in imperative form] (GLO - 44.6) "listen!". *Ûey - [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *wejā- ("twig"). The meaning is "to bud, to renew; twig". Derived word: Ûey-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T14 - l. 6) "by twig". *Ûît-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "vita" [read "wita"] ("life; food, nourishment"; in pl. - "souls, deads"), "vitis" ("vine, grape-vine, vine-plant; grape, vine") and "vito" ("to avoid, to flee, to shun"). Protoceltic has *wīti- ("food") and *wīto- ("feast"). The meaning is "to live, to eat, to feast; life, food, nourish". Derived word: Ûît-û - [n. + Pl. loc.] (T27 - l. 3/4) "in lives [=in souls?]". *Ûsp-a - [adv.] According as Latin "uspiam" (adv. "anywhere, anything"). The meaning is "anywhere, anything". Derived word: Ûsp-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] "by any places". Z
*Zaç-a- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *sasjo- ("grain"). This is the meaning. Derived word: "Za-çî" - [n. + Sing. loc.] "in grain". Zad-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 44.5) Protoceltic has *sād-eje/o- ("dive"). Sanskrit has roots "çad" [read "shad"] ("to perish, to fall, to wither, to decay"), " çâò" [read "shad"] ("to praise"), "sâdh" ("to accomplish") and "sad" ("to go, to approach"). Sumerian has "sud" ("to immerse; adj. - distant, remote; long [duration]"). The meaning is "to fall, to accomplish, to immerse [in praise]; falling, accomplishmen, immersion." Derived word: Zad-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T01 - l. 1/2) "for accomplishment". Zag-a - [n. or v.] (T38 - l. 4) (T32 - l. 2) (T16 - l. 2) Greek has ζαω [dzao] ("to live, to be alive/raw; to remain alive"), ζωη [dzoe] ("life"), ζωογο [dzoogo] ("life, animal") and ζωογονεω [dzogoneo] ("to save or preserve life; to vivify; to be alive, to live). Sumerian has "za" ("to make noise") and "zi" ("breathing"). The meaning is "to live; life". Derived words: Zaga-ta - [v. adj.] (GLO - 66.1) "alive" or "raw". Zag-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T02 - l. 10/11) "in life". Zag-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T22 - l. 2) "of life". Zag-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 46.1) (T23 - l. 5) "by lives". Zag-nu - [compound n.] (T17 - l. 6) Compound: "zag-a + nu". For "zag-a"- See T38 - l. 4. The meaning is "to live; life". For "nu"- Protoceltic has *nu- (adv. and conj. "now"). The meaning is "alive now" or "alive at moment". *Zâkogd-a- [n.] May be a proper/god name. Derived word: Zâkogd-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T08 - l. 3) "of Zâkogda". *Zal-a-[n. or v.] Protoceltic has *salā- ("moor") Greek has ζαλη [dzale] ("vertigo") and ζαλιζω [dzalidzo] ("stun"). Sanskrit has roots "dal" [here, "z" is turned into "d"] ("to break, to divide, to expand, to open"). Sumerian has "zal" ("to be full or abundant; to flow; to continue; to pass; to wait). The meaning is "to pass [in a violent way], to stun; [violent] passage, dizziness". Derived word: Zal-u [n. + Pl. abl.] (GLO - 64.2) "through passages". *Zam-a- [n. or v.] Protoceltic has *sāmo- ("rest"). The meaning is "to rest; rest". Derived words: Zam-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T32 - l. 5) "for rest". Zam-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T06 - l. 4) "in rest". Zâmm-u-ta - [v. adj.] (T34 - l. 3) "rested". Zan-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 52.1) Greek has ζωντανευω [dzontaneuo] ("animate"), ζωντανια [dzontania] ("liveliness, vigour") and ζωντανος [dzontanos] ("alive, vivid, fresh, animated, live, living"). Latin has "sanus" (adj. "sane, healthy"). The meaning is "to animate, to have vigour; vigour, life, health; alive, animated". *Zang-a - [n.] Latin has "zancha" ("slippers") and "Sanctus, Sancus or Sangus" ("Hercules"). Protoceltic has *sang-e/o- ("press"). May be a Hercules epithet - Sangus -, here "zango". Derived word: Zang-o - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T23 - l. 7) "of Zango [Hercules]". Zap-a - [n. or v.] (T21 - l. 3) Greek has σαπιζω [sapidzo] ("rot, decompose, decay"). The meaning is "to decompose, to decay; rottenness, putrefaction". Zar-a - [n. or v.] (T20 - l. 2) Greek has ζαρα [dzara] ("wrinkle"). Latin has "sarrio" ("to weed, to weed with a weeeding-tool"). The meaning is "to weed; weeding-tool". Derived words: Zar-e - [n. +
12



Sing. dat.] (T10 - l. 2/3) "for weeding-tool". Zar-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T03 - l. 1) "in weeding-tool". Zâro - [n. + Sing. gen.] (T25 - l. 6) "of weeding-tool". *Zasd-u-[subst.] May be a proper name - Zasda. Derived word: Zasd-w-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (T29 - l. 6) "by Zasdu". Zasp-a - [n.] (T33 - l. 3/4) May be a proper name, a tutelar god in T33 - l. 3. Zat-a - [n. or v.] (T38 - l. 2) Protoceltic has *satā- ("seed"). Sanskrit has root "saö" ("to be a
part or portion") and words "çâöa" [read "shata"] ("falling; decadence") and "çâda" [read "shada"] ("new grass"). The meaning is "to be part or portion, to fall; seed". Derived words: Zat-u - [n. + Pl. abl.] (T20 - l. 1) "by seeds". Zat-w-â - [n. + Sing. abl.] (GLO - 52.1) "by seed". Zatal-a or Zatl-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 51.4, GF 84) Protoceltic has *sātlā-/*sātlo- ("heel"). The meaning is "to tread (on), to trample (on); heel". Zâthj-a - [n.] (T02 - l. 7) Protoceltic has *satjā- ("swarm"). This is the meaning. *Zye- [dem. pron.] Protoceltic has *sjo- (dem. pron. "this"? "that"?). The meaning is "this, these; that, those". Derived word: Zye-ô - [dem. pron. + Pl. gen.] (T03 - l. 3) "for those". *Zîm-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "simo" ("to become flat or blunt"). Protoceltic has *sīmo("chain"). The meaning is "to chain; chain". Derived word: Zîma-ta - [v. adj.] (T23 - l. 2/3) "chained". *Zîp-a - [n. or v.] Latin has "sipho" ("siphon; pump for extinguish fire") and "sipo" ("to spread"). The meaning is "to spread; spreading". Derived word: Zîp-î - [n. + Sing. loc.] (T42 - l. 3) "in spreading". *Zît-a - [n. or v.] Greek has ζητω [dzeto] ("request, demand, postulate"). Latin has "zythum/zythus" ("beer"). The meaning is "to request, to demand, to postulate; request, demand, postulation". Derived word: Zît-e - [n. + Sing. dat.] (T19 - l. 1/2) "for demand". Zot-a - [n., v. or adj.] (T05 - l. 7) Protoceltic has *soito- (adj. "magic"). The meaning is "to be magic; magic". Zur-a - [n. or v.] (GLO - 44.4) Greek has ζοριζω [dzoridzo] ("strain"). Latin has "sura" ("calf; leg"). Sanskrit has roots "sru" ("to go; to flow"), "çûr" [read "shur"] ("to beat, to strike, to be firm; to be powerful/valiant") and "sur" ("to rule, to shine"). Sumerian has "sur" ("to rain; to produce a liquid; to flow"). The meaning is "to be powerful/valiant, to rule; power, valour, ability to rule".
DICTIONARIES AND WORKS USED IN COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS
LATIN
- SOUSA, Francisco António de. Novo dicionário latino-português. Porto: Lello & Irmão Editores, 1984. GREEK
- FREELANG Dictionary. Greek-english; English-greek [available in www.freelang.net ]. Beaumont: 1997-2005.
- TAMEZ L., Elsa & FOULKES, Irene W. de. Diccionário conciso griego-español del Nuevo Testamento. Stuttgart: United Bible Societies, 1978. PROTOCELTIC
- AUTHOR. Protoceltic-English Dictionary [document created in 2002 and available in www.wales.ac.uk (page of University of Wales). Wales: University of Wales, 2002. SANSKRIT
- BLAVATSKY, Helena Petrovna. Glossário teosófico. São Paulo: Ground, without date. - KALYANARAMAN, Dr. S. Indian lexicon [electronic version available by contact with Kalyan97@yahoo.com]. Fremont: Author, 1998. OTHERS
- AUTHOR. Sumerian lexicon [electronic version available in www.sumerianlexicon.com ]. - FREELANG Dictionary. Irish gaelic-english; English-irish gaelic [available in www.freelang.net ]. Beaumont: 1997-2005.
© by Paulo Stekel, 2006.
13