---
master_file: "[[@JingyiGaoEtymology]]"
---
# Index for JingyiGaoEtymology.pdf

Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10; http://aaatec.org/art/a_jg1
www.aaatec.org ISSN 2310-2144
On Etymology of Finnic Term for 'Sky'
Jingyi Gao
Beijing International Studies University, China; E-mail: gao.jingyi@bisu.edu.cn Institute of the Estonian Language, Tallinn, Estonia; E-mail: jingyi.gao@eki.ee University of Tartu, Estonia; E-mail: jingyi.gao@ut.ee
Abstract
Using etymological methods, the present study has identified five Sinitic and Uralic shared etymologies. These five etymologies form a rhyme correspondence. This regular sound change validates the etymological connection between Sinitic and Uralic. The Finnic term for 'sky' is among these five etymologies. It is demonstrated that this word root should be aboriginal in Sino-Uralic languages.
Keywords: Rhyme correspondence, Sinitic, Uralic, Sino-Uralic, Baltic, Germanic, Celtic, Italic, IndoIranian.
Introduction
The Finnic term for 'sky' (Estonian taevas; Finnish taivas; Livonian tōvaz; Veps taivaz; Votic taivas) has no cognate in other Uralic languages, therefore it has been previously considered a loanword to Finnic from Indo-Iranian (Schott, 1849, p. 126), from Baltic (Thomsen, 1869, p. 34, 73), or from Germanic (Koivulehto, 1972). The present study finds that this Finnic word has cognates in Sinitic languages supported by a deep rhyme correspondence consisting of five etymologies; therefore this word root must be aboriginal in Sino-Uralic languages. Gao (e.g. 2005, 2014b, 2019; Gāo, 2008) detected and identified Sinitic and Uralic shared etymologies, and has solely researched Sinitic and Uralic shared etymologies for more than a decade. We could infer a general skepticism about this approach. Several unsound language comparisons, e.g. Finnish with Basque, Finnish with Dravidian, Proto-Uralic with Proto-IndoEuropean, have become tedious. It was difficult to clarify how the Sino-Uralic comparison is extraordinarily significant. Gao (2014b) turned the focus to a solid demonstration of regular sound correspondences (rhyme and onset correspondences) between Sinitic and Uralic, and included long discussions on the methodology. In light of this, one can realize that the SinoUralic etymological studies are distinguished from those unsound language comparisons. The general direction of Sino-Uralic affinity studies should be acknowledged. A rhyme correspondence is a strict and composite rule of interlinguistic sound correlations. A rhyme correspondence achieves that not only a single phoneme but also a composite rhyme (the VCv part of a CVCv morpheme) is consistently correlated among related language varieties. The first rhyme correspondences between the Sinitic and Uralic languages have been demonstrated on the example of the Finnish -ala and -aja rhymes with ten etymologies (Gao, 2014b). A total of ten rhyme correspondences with 32 etymologies has been published (Gao, 2019). The present study adds another rhyme correspondence with five etymologies.



Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10 6
Materials and methods
The Sinitic language family is compared to Uralic language family. The Sinitic etymologies (etyma) are guided by Chinese etyma (DOMs), which are historically attested glyphs. Their historical glosses are cited from the first two Chinese classical dictionaries (121-SW and 543-YP). Their historical phonological features are cited from the work 1161-YJ. Their other attested equivalents including contemporary forms and glosses are represented by Mandarin [Beijing Yan] (Pinyin), Cantonese [Guangzhou Yue] (Jyutping) and Minnan [Taipei Min] (Tâi-lô). English glosses are made in the present study. The Uralic etyma are based on the relevant etymological dictionaries 1988-UEW and 2001SSA. Their attested equivalents including contemporary forms and glosses are represented by Estonian, Finnish, Sami\Lappish (represented by North, Lule, Inari, Skolt, Kildin Sami; North Sami forms are adjusted according to 1989-SSS), Mordvin, Mari\Cheremis, Udmurt\Votyak, Komi\Zyrian, Khanty\Ostyak, Mansi\Vogul, Hungarian, Nenets\Yurak, Enets\Yen, Nganasan\ Tawgi, Selkup and Kamass. Some modifications within Uralic etyma (adding or deleting equivalents) are made in the present study. Non-English glosses are translated to English in the present study. Etymological equivalents in some other languages (mainly Indo-European, Tibeto-Burman, suggested by other scholars) are checked according to the relevant etymological dictionaries 1959-IEW, 1988-UEW, 1996-CV5ST, 2001-SSA, and 2007-EDOC. Reconstructed forms are added only for reference reasons. All the attested forms are compared instead of trusting the phonetic and semantic details of reconstructions, because the reconstructions are subject to changes depending on attested linguistic data. Two Old Chinese reconstructions, OC-W (according to Wáng, 1980) and OC-Z (according to Zhèng-zhāng, 2013), are added. Uralic reconstructions are cited from the direct references. Proto-Sinitic, also known as Proto-Chinese, cannot be compared because it is only a theoretical notion without reconstructed results. Proto-Sino-Tibetan cannot be compared because it is a hypothetical notion without a sufficient amount of etyma representing a sufficient number of languages. Moreover, the Sino-Tibetan hypothesis has been successively criticized (Miller, 1974; Beckwith, 2002, 2006, 2008; Hé, 2004; Guō, 2010, p. 21; Zhāng, 2012). Besides, there are hypotheses for the multiple origins of Sinitic (Lǐ, 1990; Schuessler, 2003). Sinitic words are given in orthographies (in italic). Non-Sinitic words are given in orthographies (in boldface [if it is found in an official language covered by ISO 639-1] and italic) or transcriptions (in italic, mainly the Uralic Phonetic Alphabets). All the given Sinitic words are monomorphemic. If a given non-Sinitic word is longer than one morpheme, the targeted morpheme is underlined (if certain). In Finnic, conditionally apocoped phonemes are given in uppercase. In successive data, dialectal and authorial variants are separated by a slash (/); grammatical variants are separated by a backslash (\); while lexical variants are separated by a comma (,). The methods follow traditional etymology (cf. Rask, 1818) and renewed etymology (cf. Gao, 2014a, 2014b, 2017, 2019).
Results and discussion
#1)【晝】〖說文(121-SW): 日之出入與夜為界('day'); 玉篇(543-YP): 日正中('noon'); 韻鏡 (1161-YJ): 開三等(open 3rd division); Mandarin zhòu 'day'; Cantonese zau3 'day'; Minnan tiù 'day'; {OC rhyme 幽韻 *-wә; OC-W *tiu; OC- 〗
Z *tus} (Read: The Sinitic etymon 【】 after



Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10 7
〖...〗) is compared to the Uralic etymon after the equivalents: Estonian taevas 'sky'; Finnish taivas 'sky'.
This etymon has been identified in other languages: (Germanic) Danish Tyr 'the god Tyr'; Swedish Tyr 'the god Tyr'; Norwegian Ty 'the god Tyr'; Icelandic Týr 'the god Tyr'; Old Norse Týr 'the god Tyr'; Old English Tīw 'the god Tyr'; Old High German Ziu 'the god Tyr'; Gothic teiws 'the god Tyr'; (Baltic) Latvian dìevs 'god'; Lithuanian diẽvas 'god'; Old Prussian dēiwas 'god'; (Celtic) Irish dia 'god'; Old Irish día 'god'; Welsh duw 'god'; Old Welsh duiu 'god'; (Italic) Latin deus, dīvus 'god', dies 'day'; French dieu 'god'; Italian dio 'god', dì 'daytime'; Spanish dios 'god', dia 'day'; Portuguese deus 'god', dia 'day'; Romanian zeu 'god', zi 'day'; (Ancient) Greek Ζεύς (Zeús) 'the god Zeus'; Hittite sius 'god'; Armenian տիվ (tiv) 'day, daytime'; Old Armenian տիւ (tiw) 'day, daytime'; (Indo-Iranian) Sanskrit देव (devá) 'god', द् यु (dyú) 'sky, day'; Iranian Persian div 'demon'; {Proto-Indo-European *deywós 'god', *dyéws 'sky'} (← Sino-Uralic).1 This etymon must be spread from Sino-Uralic to Indo-European (not from Indo-European to Sino-Uralic as previously claimed). There are three main reasons: (1) Its meaning is more substantial in Sino-Uralic: 'day' in Sinitic, Italic, Armenian, IndoIranian ← 'sky' in Finnic and Indo-Iranian → 'god' Baltic, Celtic, Italic, Hittite, Indo-Iranian → 'a God's name' in Germanic and Greek. There should be first a substantial term for 'sky' and then the unsubstantial terms for 'day' and 'god'. It is not logical to suggest that Finnic loaned a term for 'god' to name the sky. (2) This etymology is absent from Slavic. Its existence in Baltic could be spread from Finnic. Its existence in other Indo-European groups could be spread from neighboring language groups. Its existence in Sinitic gives this etymology much deeper aboriginality in Sino-Uralic. This term is already attested in the oracle bone scripts dating to ca. 1500 B.C.E. (see Figure 1)
Figure 1. Attested form of【晝】in the oracle bone script.
(3) It is a certain Sino-Uralic etymology supported by a rhyme correspondence consisting of five etymologies. The other four etymologies are following: #2)【求】〖說文(121-SW): 索也('demand'); 韻鏡(1161-YJ): 開三等(open 3rd division); Mandarin jiū 'investigate'; Cantonese gau3 'investigate'; Minnan kiù 'investigate'; {OC rhyme 幽 韻 *-wә; OC-W *ɡiu; OC-Z *ɡu}〗 is compared to the Uralic etymon after the equivalents: Estonian kaebaS- 'accuse'; Finnish kaipaS- 'yearn for'; Sami/Lappish gáibidi-/kaiˈpēti-/käjbidi/k ͕ȧ ̭ī ̄ʙē-/-- 'demand'. This etymon has not been identified in other languages.2 #3)【究】〖說文(121-SW): 窮也('low'); 玉篇(543-YP): 深也('deep'); 韻鏡(1161-YJ): 開三 等 (open 3rd division); Mandarin jiū 'investigate'; Cantonese gau3 'investigate'; Minnan kiù 'investigate'; {OC rhyme 幽韻 *-wә; OC-W *kiu; OC-Z *kus}〗 is compared to the Uralic etymon after the equivalents: Estonian kaevaS- 'dig'; Finnish kaiva- 'dig'; Sami\Lappish goaivu
1 REFUTATION: Previously claimed (Bodman, 1980, p. 172; 2007-EDOC, p. 624) etymological equivalent Written Tibetan gdugs 'midday, noon' is rejected due to phonetic inconsistencies. 2 REFUTATION: Previously claimed (Koivulehto, 1970; 2001-SSA, vol. 1, p. 279) etymological equivalents after Proto-Germanic *kaujan; Old English cīegan, cīgan 'to call'; Old High German (gi)kewen 'to call' are rejected due to phonetic and semantic inconsistencies. Previously claimed (1996-CV5ST) etymological equivalents after Tibetan sko, bsko 'to choose', go 'to know, understand' are rejected due to phonetic and semantic inconsistencies.



Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10 8
/kåiˈvō-/koajvu-/k ͕ȯ̆ ă ̭īv̄ ɐ-/k ͔ŭa ̭īvɐ- 'dig/scoop'; Mordvin kojmä/kojme 'scoop'; Mari\ Cheremis koe/kue- 'shovel'; Nenets\Yurak śīwa 'shovel'; Enets\Yen sea 'spade'; Nganasan kaibu 'spade'; Kamass kō 'spade'; {Proto-Uralic *kojwa- 'dig, scoop' (1988-UEW, p. 170)}. This etymon has not been identified in other languages.3 #4)【流】〖說文(121-SW): 水行也('flow'); 玉篇(543-YP): 說文水行也('flow(121)'); 韻鏡 (1161-YJ): 開三等(open 3rd division); Mandarin liú 'flow'; Cantonese lau4 'flow'; Minnan liû 'flow'; { 幽
OC rhyme 韻 *-wә; OC-W *liu; OC-Z *ru}〗 is compared to the Uralic etymon after the equivalents: Estonian laevA 'ship'; Finnish laiva 'ship'; North Sami láivi 'vessel, ship'. This etymon has been identified in other languages: Latvian laiva 'ship'; Lithuanian laĩvas 'ship'; {Proto-Baltic *laiw- 'ship'} (← Finnic).4 #5)【否】〖說文(121-SW): 不也('negate'); 玉篇(543-YP): 可否('negate'); 韻鏡(1161-YJ): 開三等(open 3rd division); Mandarin fǒu 'negate; trouble'; Cantonese fau4/pei2 'negate; trouble'; Minnan phí 'negate; trouble'; {OC rhyme 之韻 *-ә; OC-W *piә; OC-Z *pɯʔ}〗 is compared to the Uralic etymon after the equivalents: Estonian vaevA 'trouble'; Finnish vaiva 'trouble'; Sami\Lappish váivi/vaiˈvē/väjvi/v ͕ȧ ̭īv̄ ė/v ͕à ̭īve 'trouble'. This etymon has not been identified in other languages.5
Overview
Aforementioned five Sino-Uralic etymologies form a regular sound change which is a rhyme correspondence: the Old Chinese rhyme 幽 韻 (*-wә) is correlated with the rhyme -ou in Mandarin, -au in Cantonese, -iu in Minnan, -aeva in Estonian, -aiva in Finnish, -aivi in North Sami (see Table 1).
Table 1. Rhyme Correspondence: Old Chinese 幽韻 *-wә6 : Mandarin -ou : Cantonese -au : Minnan -iu : Estonian -aeva : Finnish -aiva : North Sami -aivi
This is a deep rhyme correspondence with 5 etyma. It is substantially evidential. Its coincidental probability is as low as 1/324,666,368. The first etymon with a certain rhyme (1) *
3 REFUTATION: Previously claimed (2007-EDOC, p. 320) etymological equivalents after Proto-Lolo-Burmese *N-gu1, Burmese ku 'help', Lahu gu 'prepare, practice' are rejected due to phonetic and semantic inconsistencies. 4 REFUTATION: Previously claimed (Koivulehto, 1970; 2001-SSA, vol. 2, p. 39) etymological equivalents after Proto-Germanic *flauja; Old Norse fley 'ship' are rejected due to phonetic inconsistencies. Previously claimed (1996-CV5ST) etymological equivalents after Tibetan ãkhru, ãkhrud 'to wash, to bathe', khrus 'bath, washing'; Burmese khjǝwh (Old Burmese khuiw) 'to wash, bathe'; Kachin khrut2 'to bathe, wash'; Lushai ṭhuaʔ 'to wash or rinse (as inside of bottle)' are rejected due to phonetic and semantic inconsistencies. 5 REFUTATION: Previously claimed (Thomsen, 1869, p. 157; 2001-SSA, vol. 3, p. 394) etymological equivalents after Proto-Germanic *waiwan- 'pain'; Old High German wēwo; English woe are rejected due to phonetic and semantic inconsistencies. 6 In this rhyme correspondence, the fifth etymon belongs to Old Chinese rhyme 之韻 *-ә.



Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10 9
the first etymon has comparable onsets (1/4 [There are four sorts of onsets: labial, coronal, dorsal and laryngeal.]) * the second etymon falls into the same Old Chinese rhyme group (1/29 [There are 29 rhyme groups in Old Chinese.]) * the second etymon has comparable onsets (1/4) * the third etymon falls into the same Old Chinese rhyme group (1/29) * the third etymon has comparable onsets (1/4) * the fourth etymon falls into the same Old Chinese rhyme group (1/29) * the fourth etymon has comparable onsets (1/4) * the fifth etymon falls into the same Mandarin rhyme group (1/13 [There are 13 rhyme groups in Mandarin.]) * the fifth etymon has comparable onsets = 1 * 1/4 * 1/29 * 1/4 * 1/29 * 1/4 * 1/29 * 1/4 * 1/13 * 1/4 = 1/324,666,368.
Conclusions
Using etymological methods, the present study has identified five Sinitic and Uralic shared etymologies. These five etymologies form a rhyme correspondence. This regular sound change validates the etymological connection between Sinitic and Uralic. The Finnic term for 'sky' is among these five etymologies. It is demonstrated that this word root should be aboriginal in Sino-Uralic languages.
References
121-SW – Xǔ, Shèn 許慎. Shuō wén jiě zì 說文解字. Luoyang 雒阳, 121. 543-YP – Gù, Yě-wáng 顧野王. Yù piān 玉篇. Nanjing 建康, 543. 1161-YJ – Zhāng, Lín-zhī (jiào) 张麟之校. Yùn jìng 韻鏡. Hangzhou 臨安, 1161.
1959-IEW – Pokorny, Julius. Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Bern: Francke, 1959.
1988-UEW – Rédei, Károly. Uralisches etymologisches Wörterbuch (Band I–II). Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1988.
1989-SSS – Sammallahti, Pekka. Sámi-suoma sátnegirji / Saamelais-suomalainen sanakirja. Ohcejohka (Utsjoki): Jorgaleaddji, 1989. 1996-CV5ST – Peiros, Ilia; Starostin, Sergei. A Comparative Vocabulary of Five Sino-Tibetan Languages. Parkville (Victoria): University of Melbourne, Department of Linguistics and Applied Linguistics, 1996. 2001-SSA – Itkonen, Erkki; Kulonen, Ulla-Maija. (päätoimittajat). Suomen sanojen alkuperä: Etymologinen sanakirja (1/2/3). Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura; Kotimaisten Kielten Tutkimuskeskus, 2001.
2007-EDOC – Schuessler, Axel. ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2007. Beckwith, 2002 – Beckwith, Christopher I. The Sino-Tibetan problem. In: Mediaeval TibetoBurman Languages. Leiden et al.: Brill, 2002; pp. 113–158. Beckwith, 2006 – Beckwith, Christopher I. Old Tibetan and the dialects and periodization of Old Chinese. In: Medieval Tibeto-Burman Languages II. Leiden et al.: Brill, 2006; pp. 179–200. Beckwith, 2008 – Beckwith, Christopher I. Old Chinese loans in Tibetan and the non-uniqueness of “Sino-Tibetan”. In: Medieval Tibeto-Burman Languages III. Leiden et al.: Brill, 2008; pp. 161–201. Bodman, 1980 – Bodman, Nicholas C. Chinese and Sino-Tibetan: Evidence towards establishing the nature of their relationship. In: Contributions to Historical Linguistics. Leiden: E. J. Brill; pp. 34–199.



Archaeoastronomy and Ancient Technologies 2019, 7(2), 5–10 10
Gao, 2005 – Gao, Jingyi. Comparison of Swadesh 100 Words in Finnic, Hungarian, Sinic and Tibetan. Tallinn: Estonian Language Foundation, 2005. Gāo, 2008 – Gāo, Jīng-yī 高晶一. Hàn-yǔ yǔ Běi-ōu yǔ-yán 汉语与北欧语言. Beijing 北京: China Social Sciences Press 中国社会科学出版社, 2008. Gao, 2014a – Gao, Jingyi. Huns and Xiongnu identified by Hungarian and Yeniseian shared etymologies. Central Asiatic Journal 2012/2013 [2014], 56, 41–48. Gao, 2014b – Gao, Jingyi. Rhyme correspondences between Sinitic and Uralic languages: On the example of the Finnish -ala and -aja rhymes. Linguistica Uralica 2014, 50, 2, 94–108. Gao, 2017 – Gao, Jingyi. Xia and Ket identified by Sinitic and Yeniseian shared etymologies. Central Asiatic Journal 2017, 60, 51–58.
Gao, 2019 – Gao, Jingyi. Veel hiina ja soome-ugri keelte ühiseid etümoloogiaid riimivastavuse näitel. Idakiri: Eesti Akadeemilise Orientaalseltsi aastaraamat 2018 [2019], 71–80.
Guō, 2010 – Guō, Xī-liáng 郭錫良. Hàn-zì gǔ-yīn shǒu-cè 漢字古音手册. Beijing 北京: The Commercial Press 商務印書館, 2010. Hé, 2004 – Hé, Jiǔ-yíng 何九盈. Hàn-yǔ hé qīn-shǔ yǔ-yán bǐ-jiào yán-jiū de jī-běn yuán-zé 汉 语和亲属语言比较研究的基本原则. Yǔ-yán-xué lùn-cóng 语言学论丛 2004, 29, 12–66. Koivulehto, 1970 – Koivulehto, Jorma. Suomen laiva-sanasta. Virittäjä 1970, 74, 2, 178–183. Koivulehto, 1972 – Koivulehto, Jorma. Germanisch-Finnische Lehnbeziehungen II: Wirtschaftliches und Landwirtschaftliches. Neuphilologische Mitteilungen 1972, 73, 1/3, 575–628. Lǐ, 1990 – Lǐ, Bǎo-jiā 李葆嘉. Shì-lùn yuán-shǐ huá-xià-yǔ de lì-shǐ bèi-jǐng 试论原始华夏语的 历史背景. Yǔ-yán-xué tōng-xùn 语言学通讯 1990, 1/2, 1–2.
Miller, 1974 – Miller, Roy A. Sino-Tibetan: Inspection of a conspectus. Journal of the American Oriental Society 1974, 94, 2, 195–209. Rask, 1818 – Rask, R[asmus] K[ristian]. Undersögelse om det gamle Nordiske eller Islandske Sprogs Oprindelse. Kjöbenhavn: Gyldendal, 1818.
Schott, 1849 – Schott, Wilhelm. Über das Altai'sche oder Finnisch-Tatarische Sprachengeschlecht. Berlin: bei G. Reimer, 1849. Schuessler, 2003 – Schuessler, Axel. Multiple origins of the Old Chinese lexicon. Journal of Chinese Linguistics 2003, 31, 1, 1–71. Thomsen, 1869 – Thomsen, Vilhelm. Den gotiske sprogklasses indflydelse på den finske. København: Gyldendal, 1869. Wáng, 1980 – Wáng, Lì 王力. Shī-jīng yùn dú 诗经韵读. Shanghai 上海: Shanghai Press of Classics 上海古籍出版社, 1980. Zhāng, 2012 – Zhāng, Mín-quán 张民权. Hàn-zàng tóng-yuán jiǎ-shuō yǔ gǔ-yīn yán-jiū zhōng de ruò-gān wèn-tí 汉藏同源假说与古音研究中的若干问题. Shān-xī dà-xué xué-bào (zhéxué-shè-huì-kē-xué bǎn) 山西大学学报(哲学社会科学版) 2012, 9, 10–17.
Zhèng-zhāng, 2013 – Zhèng-zhāng, Shàng-fāng 郑 张 尚 芳 . Shàng-gǔ yīn-xì 上 古 音 系 . Shanghai 上海: Shanghai Education Press 上海教育出版社, 2013.
© This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons by Attribution (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).