---
master_file: "[[@RichardAverbackAncient]]"
---
# Index for RichardAverbackAncient.pdf

Ancient Near Eastern Mythography as It
Relates to Historiography in the Hebrew Bible:
Genesis 3 and the Cosmic Battle
RICHARD E. AVERBECK
One of the most fascinating dimensions of the study of the Bible in its ancient Near Eastern context is the appearance of mythological allusions and themes in the Bible for which we have clearly recognizable data from the world of the ancient Near East. The goal of this paper is to investigate the relationship of theology, history, and ancient Near Eastern mythology in the Hebrew Bible. It is unfortunate that so much of the discussion on this topic has been clouded by serious problems of perspective, definition, and method. One scholar's mythology may be another one's history or theology, and both could be mixed up or confused with historiography. It seems to me that the discussion too often ends up going around in circles without getting to the heart of the problem of the relationship between biblical and ancient Near Eastern history and myth. We too easily end up in a tangle of unclear or unhelpful definitions, confused or misguided perspectives, and/or inadequate or even misleading methodologies. I will make every effort to avoid such confusion in the following discussion. In order to do so, as we proceed it will be very important to clearly distinguish between the verifiable data from the Bible and from the ancient Near East and the various scholarly theories about those data. In this area of study scholars sometimes confuse their own or someone else's theory with the actually verifiable data that are available, and end up treating a theory as if it were confirmed data and/or ignoring data that do not fit the specific theory. Precisely because this is such a difficult topic to manage, it requires intellectual honesty and openness to the available data, whether biblical or extrabiblical, but we must be sure to distinguish between data and theories about the data.
328



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
Historiography
The confusion in the realms of definition and perspective mentioned above is not just a matter of interference from creedal convictions, or degrees of conservatism (of one sort or another) versus revisionism. John Van Seters, for example, is willing to call Genesis through Kings "history writing;' whereas Thomas L. Thompson considers virtually the entire narrative to be an account of Israel's "mythic past."1 Neither of these men holds his view based on confessional considerations, and both are committed revisionists. So how can one call this section of the Hebrew Bible "history writing" and the other call it "myth"?2 One element of special importance in this discussion is the definition and nature of "historiography" - the study of the theoretical principles, methods, techniques, usefulness, and even the very history of history writing itself. As those who are familiar with the discussion will know, by using the term "history writing" Van Seters does not mean to suggest that the bulk of Genesis through Kings is historically accurate. In fact, he is not really all that concerned about "historicity." He works from Johan Huizinga's well-worn definition of history as "the intellectual form in which a civilization renders account to itself of its past."3 A civilization's own account of its past, according to Van Seters, may well be largely fictitious, but, nevertheless, it is still "history writing." He even argues that Genesis 1-11 is "history writing" in the sense that it is presented as an integral part of Israel's history, although he would call it a case of the "historisization of mythology."4 In my opinion, Huizinga's definition is a good one, perhaps the best,
1. John Van Seters, Prologue to History: The Yahwist as Historian in Genesis (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1992), 24-42 and passim; Thomas L. Thompson, The Mythic Past: Biblical Archaeology and the Myth of Israel (New York: Basic Books, 1999), 7 and passim. 2. I have sought to untangle this confusing web of competing presuppositions, definitions, and arguments in another article: Richard E. Averbeck, "Sumer, the Bible, and Comparative Method: Historiography and Temple Building," in Mesopotamia and the Bible, ed. Mark W. Chavalas and K. Lawson Younger, Jr. (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 2002), 88-125. I will not review that discussion in full detail here, but will focus on specific points of special significance for the present essay. 3. Johan Huizinga, ''A Definition of the Concept of History," in Philosophy and History: Essays Presented to Ernst Cassirer, ed. Raymond Klibansky and H. J. Paton (1936; repr. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1963), 9. This is, in fact, the same definition with which Van Seters begins his discussion; In Search of History: Historiography in the Ancient World and the Origins of Biblical History (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983), 1-2. See also review of Van Seters by K. Lawson Younger, Jr., fSOT 40 (1988): 110-17. 4. Van Seters, Prologue to History, 26-27, 188-93, 330-31.



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
but those who use it do not always use it fairly. On the one hand, following Huizinga, and over against Thompson, Van Seters properly resists the scholarly temptation to impose modern standards and criteria for history writing on the ancients. We need to allow them their own way of rendering account to themselves of their past. This is essential. On the other hand, Huizinga is also concerned that there be a substantial correspondence between what actually happened in the historical past of a civilization and their history writing:
Every civilization and every sectional civilization must hold its own history to be the true one, and is entitled to do so, provided that it constructs this history in accordance with the critical requirements imposed by its conscience as a civilization, and not according to the cravings for power in the interests of which it imposes silence upon this conscience.5
This is where Thompson has made a good point. The degree to which Genesis through Kings accurately recount what actually happened in the past, even if the writers did put a certain interpretation on it, to that degree those books constitute legitimate "history writing." If Genesis through Kings consist largely of fictitious misrepresentations of historical fact for purposes of political propaganda or even theological tendenz, or if these biblical books are outright fictional fabrications that have no basis in the real past, then they should not be called "history writing." By definition, legitimate history writing cannot be substantially fictional, whether in ancient or modern times. The problem with Thompson, of course, is his radical historical skepticism and associated nihilism regarding the use of the Bible in writing the history of ancient Israel today.
Mythography
This brings us to the relationship between history and myth, or better historiography and mythography, in the study of history writing. "Mythography" may be defined as the critical study of the nature, principles, significance, and history of myths and mythical literature. It also includes the study of mythical elements in various other kinds of literature.6 The very fact that we conceive
5· Huizinga, 9 (emphasis his).
6. William G. Doty, Mythography: The Study ofMyths and Rituals (University, Ala.: University of Alabama Press, 1986), 1-40, esp. 8. See also the remarks on myth, legend, and history in the Bible in Richard E. Averbeck, "The Sumerian Historiographic Tradition and Its Implica
330



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
of "the presence of either myth or legend in a historical work" as that which "requires some explanation"7 is, in my opinion, the real underlying problem. We have tended to identify myth and legend with fiction, and as I have just argued, fiction is by nature not ((history writing;' even if, as the saying goes, the truth (of history) can be stranger than fiction. It is most certainly true that the Israelites were ancient Near Easterners themselves. They were not a cultural tabula rasa. Certain common cultural foundations were well known across that world, and Israel was no exception. Moreover, people in the ancient Near East were given to speculating about and articulating their understanding of the world through stories about power and relations among the gods - mythology.8 Basically, myths are creative and imaginative stories about important things. They often carry significant weight in the cultural context in which they develop and into which they speak. We are not talking here about a limited kind of "primitive mentality" that treats the ancients as ignorant prescientific people. They did not lack the ability to think in empirical and sophisticated ways. However, ancient Near Easterners did indeed make it their practice to express their speculations about world forces and their situation amid them by means of very sophisticated compilations of mythological motifs and patterns. It is not my intent here to play semantic games with "different kinds of truth." What I am concerned about is different ways of understanding and describing what really is or was true in history, nature, culture, society, and so on. Myth is much more than fiction, even if it has fictional elements in it.9 The term fiction, on the one hand, refers to imaginative stories that have no actual basis in historical fact. Myth, on the other hand, consists of imaginative stories that do have a basis in reality and/or history. In fact, myth reflects foundational understandings of the world that are important to the culture of the composer and those who read his compositions or hear them read. There is a natural correspondence linking fiction, myth, and history because all three manifest themselves primarily in story form, but they are different kinds of stories. A rather large body of schoJarly literature about mythology has arisen in the fields of cultural anthropology, philosophy, and literary studies in the last half of the 20th century. The most convenient summary of this scholar
tions for Genesis 1-11;' in Faith, Tradition, and History: Old Testament Historiography in Its Near Eastern Context, ed. Alan R. Millard, James K. Hoffmeier, and David W. Baker (Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1994), 92-93, 95-96.
7. Van Seters, Prologue to History, 25.
8. See Doty, esp. 61-65, for his remarks on "mythmaking" and "mythopoeic" thought. 9. Doty, 7-8.
331



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
ship is found in Mary Douglas's book on reading Leviticus as literature. She spends 50 pages explaining and illustrating the difference between what she calls "analogical" and "rational-instrumental" ways of thinking and writing. 10 The remainder of her book illustrates her understanding of how essential this distinction is for understanding the ritual descriptions and prescriptions in Leviticus. For our purposes here it is important to know that she actually begins her discussion with myth as analogical thinking, and moves from there to ritual. II Treating myth and ritual together is common, and there is good reason for it. 12 In general, the kind of "myth" we are concerned about here might be labeled "historical myth." It consists largely of analogical thinking about what is perceived by the writer(s) as reality, specifically historical, natural, geographical, cultural, economic, or social reality.13 By way of contrast, sacred "ritual" is analogical action, by means of which the performer engages actively with that which is perceived as reality in the world of the gods or other supernatural beings. The kind of myth referred to here reflects upon the human world by describing or imaging creative analogies between the circumstances and experiences of human beings in the world and beliefs about the world of the gods and other supernatural beings. In the process, therefore, this kind of myth naturally contemplates and describes the perception and understanding that the writer has of her or his world. 14 Yes, there are fictional elements here to one degree or another, but myth is not just fiction. There are two main points here. First, a myth was not nec
10. Mary Douglas, Leviticus as Literature (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 15-65. 11. Douglas, 15-33. 12. See even Doty's subtitle, The Study of Myths and Rituals. 13. See the helpful distinctions made between four different modes of mythic composition in Kenton L. Sparks, "The Problem of Myth in Ancient Historiography," in Rethinking the Foundations: Historiography in the Ancient World and in the Bible: Essays in Honour ofJohn Van Seters, ed. Steven L. McKenzie and Thomas Romer. BZAW 294 (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2000),271-77. Of the four types (psychological, metaphorical, historical, and pleasure myths), our focus here is on "historical myths," and among those the "analogical" type (275-76), which "produces a text that the author views to be referentially accurate and true...." 14. It seems to me that the same principle applies mutatis mutandis to other kinds ofliterature as well. Again, myth is not just about the gods. Nevertheless, it often refers to gods or supernatural creatures of some sort, and the kind of myth we are talking about here creates and makes effective use of analogies between the world of the gods and the world of people. Similarly, "legend" or "epic," like myth, is also analogical to the real world, but in this instance significant people rather than gods or other supernatural beings are the source of the analogical elements in the story. Likewise, "fable" is analogical to the real world of people with animals and/ or plants as the analogical center of attention, etc.
332



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
essarily fictional at all to the ancient writers and readers. IS This is not just a matter of whether or not they believed in the gods or the events about which they wrote. Many of them surely did, although some probably did not, and some may have believed in an alternate mythology. In either case, one side of the analogy was associated with the author's knowledge and experience of the historical, natural, geographical, cultural, economic, or social reality in which he or she lived. They were not writing out of pure imagination, even though their religious and/or literary imagination could be fully exercised in their myths. Second, since their myths were not just pure imagination but were analogical reflections of their view of the real world, therefore, they are not just fiction to us either when we read them today. They have something to say about the world the ancients lived in, so they are often useful in understanding that ancient world and the way at least some people experienced it. Moreover, and this is of great significance to us here, there are often some important correspondences between their world and ours, both in terms of the nature of the world and the way we experience it today. The mythical analogical character of the story does not eliminate the fact that the realities upon which the story is based did exist and were important to the ancient people and, in fact, may correspond at least in some instances to things that are important to us today. Yes, there is fiction here, but not just fiction. In our modern day we sometimes pride ourselves on the scientific method as an objective means of investigation that makes exclusive use of what Douglas refers to as rational-instrumental thinking. There have even been attempts to use the so-called scientific method in the soft sciences, such fields as sociology, psychology, and history, thereby supposedly limiting our investigation to completely naturalistic causes and effects of one kind or another. In recent decades, however, we have been made more aware of what has always been true even in the hard sciences such as mathematics, physics, and chemistry. The fact is that mathematical and scientific inquiry is based on the construction of models - that is, paradigms or analogies. In reality, analogical thinking provides the larger framework of the model within which rational-instrumental thinking can do its legitimate work. Rationalinstrumental thinking is not imaginative and creative enough to develop the models themselves. 16
15. Sparks, e.g., makes the point that a "historical myth" consists of "... a creative narrative that is for the author anything but fictive.... While we might readily associate the trait of manifest impossibility with the mythic genre for heuristic purposes, we ought to restrain ourselves from presuming too quickly that a myth was, for its author, referentially fictive" (275-76). 16. See esp. Douglas, 21, 27-28, 32. Compare Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific
333



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
In the ancient and the modern world we find analogical as well as rational-instrumental thinking. In the ancient Near East mythology served the need for analogical thinking, and rational-instrumental thinking was necessary to accomplish feats such as the irrigation agriculture of ancient Sumer. In our modern world we need models to give direction to scientific inquiry, whether in the hard or soft sciences. In physics, for example, it might be the wave or particle model of light, or in psychology it might be the medical model of mental "illness." We should not be so foolish as to think that we have left "mythology" behind either. The only real difference is that we tend to do mythology scientifically, so we have a lot of what we call today "science fiction;' which is really scientifically articulated mythology. Furthermore, this mythology has captured the imagination of our culture to such a degree that it even motivates actual scientific inquiry into such things as the quest for life in other solar systems. Recently, with the development of what some have been calling "postmodernism;' there has been a reaction to the dehumanizing effect -of "modernism." This has brought with it a reintroduction of spiritual concerns and spiritual beings into our modern mythologies and even some of the sciences. 17
Ancient Near Eastern Mythology
The point is that this is not really a matter of ancient versus modern thinking at all. 18 Who knows how much their myths captured the imagination of the ancient Near Eastern peoples, or at least some of them, as ours do for some of us? One of the clearest examples of such mythological analogical thinking in the ancient Near Eastern world that I am aware of is the Sumerian myth known as Enki and the World Order.19 It is a long and relatively well
Revolutions, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970); and the most helpful recent summary of Kuhn's analysis with a review and critique of its use in the social sciences and biblical studies by Robert F. Shedinger, "Kuhnian Paradigms and Biblical Scholarship: Is Biblical Studies a Science?" fBL 119 (2000): 453-7l. 17. So we now have, e.g., "transpersonal psychology" as a legitimate branch of modern counseling psychology, which concerns itself with "the study of humanity's highest potential, and with the recognition, understanding, and realization of unitive, spiritual, and transcendent states of consciousness." Quoted in James E. Strohl, "Transpersonalism: Ego Meets Soul," Journal of Counseling and Development 76 (1998): 397 from a study by Lajoie and Shapiro. 18. See John W. Rogerson, Myth in Old Testament Interpretation. BZAW 134 (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1974), esp. 180-89, for a summary and critique of the whole problem of myth in biblical studies, in which we have been hindered for too long by socio-evolutionary schemes that misrepresent not only the ancients but also ourselves. 19. I have recently had occasion to examine this text with some care. The observations
334



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
preserved composition having many extant copies, although there are some tantalizing lacunae in the story. The myth begins with the author's opening praise of Enki, the god of Eridu, the god of fertility and productivity, whom Enlil, the chief god of Nippur and Sumer overall, commissioned to make rulers and common people alike happy, prosperous, and secure in Sumer.20 In the following section Enki speaks in praise of himself twice. In his first self-praise, Enki speaks initially of how his brother, Enlil, had given him control of the me's; literally, "the me to my hand he set" (me su-gulO-se muun-guar, line 65). These are the offices, arts, and crafts with their associated functional powers that, according to the Sumerian view, shaped and tooled their culture and society so that it worked for both gods and people. Then Enki turns to the fact that Enlil had likewise granted him control of the decreeing of destinies/fates, literally, "decreeing destiny/fate ... in my hand he placed" (nam-tar-ra ... su-gua mu-un-gual, line 76), which makes him the one who determines what happens in heaven and earth, whether good or bad.21 At a certain point in the composition, Enki turns his attention to the proper development of the Sumerian homeland. This is a very lengthy third person narrative (lines 250-386), and of special interest to our considerations in this essay. The passage takes us through 12 cycles, each of which recounts how Enki himself first initiated a particular set of forces of nature and/or cultural phenomena that would make Sumer a prosperous place (or perhaps revived or restored them, depending on how one interprets the composition as a whole), and then put one of the gods in charge of each. This cyclical pattern creates a set of analogical relationships between these gods and the realities of man's world, which is one of Douglas's points about the analogical nature of mythical thinking and ritual action. Texts of this sort create their own inter
here are based on Richard E. Averbeck, "Daily Life and Culture in Enki and the World Order and Other Sumerian Literary Compositions;' in Life and Culture in the Ancient Near East, ed. Averbeck, Mark W. Chavalas, and David B. Weisberg (Bethesda: CDL, 2003), 23-61. See also Samuel Noah Kramer and John Maier, eds., Myths ofEnki, the Crafty God (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 38-56, which refers to this composition as "Enki and Inanna: The Organization of the Earth and Its Cultural Processes:' 20. For a brief sketch of the competing but relatively compatible theologies of Nippur, Lagash, and Eridu in ancient Sumer, see the review of Kramer and Maier in William W. Hallo, "Enki and the Theology of Eridu," JAOS 116 (1996): 231-34. 21. For more on the me's and decreeing of destiny, see Richard E. Averbeck, "Ritual Formula, Textual Frame, and Thematic Echo in the Cylinders of Gudea," in Crossing Boundaries and Linking Horizons: Studies in Honor ofMichael C. Astour on His 80th Birthday, ed. Gordon D. Young, Mark W. Chavalas, and Averbeck (Bethesda: CDL, 1997), 82-83, n. 98; see also Averbeck, "The Cylinders of Gudea," in COS 2:418, nn. 1-2, and the primary and secondary literature cited in those places.
335



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
nal sets of analogies that organize the view of the world presented in the composition and carry the story along. First Enki ejaculates to fill the Tigris and Euphrates with the flow oflifegiving water, and predicts that this will cause there to be sweet wine and abundant barley. He puts "Enbilulu, the inspector of rivers" in charge of this. The second cycle is fragmentary, but it refers to the marsh regions and the abundance of reeds, fish, and fowl supplied there. Third, he puts the goddess Nanse in charge of the area near the awesome sea in the south (the Persian Gulf) and the high flood of the subterranean waters. The first three cycles, therefore, appear to move from north to south through the land in terms of the supply of waters and the abundance that naturally comes with that. There is no lack of correspondence to the real geography of the land here, although it is certainly fictional on another level. The same is true for the rest of the composition. The next three cycles focus on the natural and socio-cultural resources for irrigation agriculture including rain, the making of canals, agricultural implements such as the plow, and the crops barley, lentils, and chickpeas. The seventh and eight cycles relate to the construction of houses and other buildings, which involved the fabrication of bricks with hoe and brick mold, laying the bricks to make foundations, and the various levels of design work that go into such construction work. In cycles nine and ten Enki moves from the river basin and canal regions to the plain (Sum. edin) where ecology, vocations, and lifestyle are of a different kind altogether. The upland plains were a place where wild animals such as the ibex and wild goats grazed on grass and herbs. The inland plains were also a place of grass and herbs, but here the focus is on domesticated sheep and cattle, sheepfolds and cow pens, fat and cream. The eleventh cycle tells us how Enki organized Sumer by establishing boundaries between the various cities, provided dwellings for the Anunna gods in them, divided the agricultural land among them, and put Utu, the sun-god and divine judge, in charge of maintaining this order. Finally, the twelfth cycle tells us that Enki also established the textile industry as the task of women and placed the goddess "Uttu, the dependable woman, the silent one" in charge of it. We have extensive archaeological and geographical surveys as well as a wealth of administrative and economic documents that fill out our understanding of much of the realia lying behind this Sumerian mythological literary composition and others that coordinate with it in one way or another, to one degree or another.22 The conceptual analogies between the world of the
22. See the references and summary discussion in Averbeck, "Daily Life and Culture," and esp. the very helpful data collections, analyses, and summaries in Robert McCormick Ad



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
gods and humans are manifestly evident here. This should survive even the careful scrutiny of some interpreters of Sumerian myths, who characteristically, and sometimes rightly, question virtually any proposed substantial correspondence between the real world of the ancient Sumerians and their literary compositions.23
Ancient Near Eastern Myth in Biblical History and Theology
Moving closer to home as far as the Hebrew Bible and ancient Israel are concerned, we turn now to the Ugaritic Baal myth. Unlike the Sumerian myth Enki and the World Order discussed above, there has been a great deal of legitimate scholarly debate about the proper analogical understanding of the Baal myth. I will not belabor that problem here, since it is not essential to the concerns of this essay.24 The purpose for discussing the Baal myth here is to show that when an ancient Near Eastern mythological analogy suited the historical and/or theological purpose of the biblical writers, they did not hesitate to use it for their own purposes.
Leviathan at Ugarit and in the Bible
In general, the main story line involves four major deities: El, the chief god of the pantheon; Baal, the main weather-god; Yam, the sea serpent and god of the sea; and Mot, the god of death. The most commonly accepted sequential arrangement and understanding of this six-tablet composition suggests that
ams, Heartland ofCities: Surveys ofAncient Settlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981); P. R. S. Moorey, Ancient Mesopotamian Materials and Industries: The Archaeological Evidence (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994); and Daniel C. Snell, Life in the Ancient Near East, 3100-332 RC.B. (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996). 23. See, e.g., the very careful remarks on these kinds of issues in Jerrold S. Cooper, "Literature and History: The Historical and Political Referents of Sumerian Literary Texts," in Historiography in the Cuneiform World, ed. Tzvi Abusch, Paul-Alain Beaulieu, John Huehnergard, Peter Machinist, and Piotr Steinkeller. Proceedings of the XLVe Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale 1 (Bethesda: CDL, 2001), 131-47. 24. For a full review of the major interpretations of the Baal cycle at Ugarit see Mark S. Smith, The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, 1: Introduction with Text, Translation and Commentary of KTU 1.1-1.2. VTSup 55 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994), 58-114. Other briefer reviews are Simon B. Parker, ed., Ugaritic Narrative P()etry. SBLWAW 9 (Atlanta: Scholars, 1997),83-85; Dennis Pardee, "The Ba'lu Myth (1.86);' in COS 1:241-42.
337



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
there were three main parts to the story. First, with the permission of EI, Baal challenged Yam's kingship and won the ensuing battle. Second, since he was the victor, Baal obtained permission from EI to have a palace built for himself as was fit for one with dominion among the gods. Third, Mot challenged Baal to a battle, which he won by defeating and killing Baal. In due course, however, Baal returned from the underworld, resumed his throne, and subdued Mot. 25 At the beginning of the third part of the story, when Mot voices his challenge to Baal's supremacy, he refers back to Leviathan's defeat at the hands of Baal and predicts that he himself will not suffer the same fate. He introduces the subject of Baal's defeat of Leviathan as follows (KTU2 1.5 col. i lines 1-3; cf. also lines 27-30):26
k . ltn . btn .
tkly. btn. <qltn. [[SJP7 slyt. d . sb't . rasm
When you smote Lotan (or Litan), the fleeing serpent,
finished off the twisted serpent, the tyranLwith seven heads28
The correspondence with Isa. 27:1 is indisputable:
l'JOl
25. See the summary of scholarship and translation with substantial notes by Pardee, 24174. For the transliterated text, see KTU2 = Manfried Dietrich, Oswald Loretz, and Joaquin Sanmartin, The Cuneiform Alphabetic Texts from Ugarit, Ras Ibn Hani, and Other Places, 2nd ed. ALASP 8 (Munster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1995), 1-28, texts 1.1-6. Introductions with side-by-side transliteration and translation along with a few textual and interpretive notes can be found in J. c. L. Gibson, Canaanite Myths and Legends (Edinburgh: T.&T. Clark, 1978), 2-19, 37-81; and Mark S. Smith, "The Baal Cycle," in Parker, 87-180. We eagerly await the future vol. 2 of Smith, The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, for a more extensive commentary on KTU2 1.3-6. 26. See KTU2 22 for the transliteration (although I have transliterated more strictly rasm rather than KTU2 rasm in line 30 to match more closely its Hebrew cognate in Psalm 74 below). Cf. the translation and remarks in Smith, "The Baal Cycle;' 141-42, and Pardee, 265. The translation offered here is mine. 27. The [[ s]] transcription with the double brackets means that a swas written and then erased on the tablet. Perhaps the scribe began writing the next word (slyt) and then decided to move to the next line instead. 28. For the important parallel passage in the Anat section of the Baal myth, see the discussion of Wayne Pitard's recent contribution to this subject, below n. 33. The reference to plural (i.e., seven) "heads" compares with Ps. 74:13-14 (see below). The other highlighted words correspond to Isa. 27:1 cited and discussed presently.



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
In that day the Lord will punish Leviathan (Heb. lwytn = Ugar. ltn) the fleeing (Heb. brh = Ugar. brh) serpent with his harsh and great and mighty sword, even Leviathan the twisted (Heb. <qltwn = Ugar. <qltn) serpent; and he will kill the dragon (Heb. tnnyn) who is in the sea (Heb. ym; cf. the Ugaritic god Yam).
Take special note of the close parallels between these two passages, which I have highlighted in some of the parenthetical insertions in the rendering of Isa. 27:1 above. «Leviathan" is obvious even in the English translations, but consider also the adjectives «fleeing"29 and «twisted." The term rendered «twisted" occurs only here in the Hebrew Scripture, which makes it difficult to avoid the conclusion that this is a free quotation of the myth of Baal's battle with the sea monster or perhaps a stock phrase.3o The term for «serpent" here is Hebrew not the same as Ugaritic b!n in the parallel passage, but it
29. Aside from Isa. 27:1, the adjective lJ":If occurs only two or perhaps three other times in the Hebrew Bible. For other possible meanings of the term, see HAL, 1:156 (e.g., "flashing" as in "fast;' or "hairless, slippery" as serpents are). Whatever the correct meaning might be, it is obviously the same in Ugaritic and in Hebrew. It occurs once or twice meaning "fugitives" (lsa. 15:5 and perhaps also 43:14, but the latter is problematic), and once in a passage that has significant parallels to Isa. 27:1, including the exact expression "fleeing serpent" in Job 26:12-13:
"He quieted the sea (Heb. ym) with his power, And by his understanding he shattered Rahab. By his breath the heavens are cleared; His hand has pierced the fleeing serpent (n'":If
Aside from the reference to the "sea" (cf. the last word in Isa. 2pb), the term "Rahab" (:::1;:1,) occurs several times in the Hebrew Bible in reference to the monster of the sea who symbolizes the violent storminess and crashing of the waves (the related verb means "to storm, act arrogantly"; HAL, 3:1192-93). See e.g., Isa. 51:9-10:
"Awake, awake, put on strength, 0 arm of the Lord! Awake, as in days of old, the generations of long ago! Was it not you who cut Rahab in pieces, who pierced the dragon? (l'm; cf. Isa. 27:1) Was it not you who dried up the sea (Heb. ym), the waters of the great deep (O;n1;1, another word for the "sea"); who made the depths of the sea (Heb. ym again) a way for the redeemed to cross over?" (NRSV)
Compare also "Rahab" in Job 9:13; Ps. 89:10-11(9-10), and perhaps also its use in reference to Egypt as a useless support in Isa. 30:7 (cf. Ps. 87:4). Pay special attention to the mixture of the primordial motifs and historical allusions here, especially the reference to drying up the sea so the people could cross over (cf. Exodus 14-15). 30. The related pual participle occurs in Hab. 1:4, "The wicked surround the righteous therefore judgment comes forth perverted)" (NRSV). The intensive adjective appears in two
339



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
is the same word used in Gen. 3:14 (see more below). The significance of tnnyn and ym in this verse will become apparent later in this essay. Isaiah 27 belongs to the so-called «little apocalypse" of Isaiah 24-27, which looks forward to the day when the Lord will set all things right. 31 In that day it will be the Lord, not Baal, who will defeat the great enemy of God and his people. One can hear the polemic against Baal in favor of the Lord resounding, even as Isaiah baldly alludes to the «twisted serpent" Leviathan. Unlike Isaiah 27, Psalm 74 puts the battle(s) in Israel's past, «from of old;' and refers to God's victory or victories in the past in order to call upon him to intervene once again on behalf of his people Israel. The Psalmist writes in verse 11, "Why do you hold back your hand; why do you keep your hand in your bosom?" He then goes on to say:
12
'WK, 13
C)!7 'WK, 14
12 Still, God is my King from of old>-performing salvation in the earth. 13 You divided the sea by your might; you broke the heads of the dragons (Heb. tnnynym; cf. sg. tnnyn in Isa. 27:1) in the waters.
14 You crushed the heads (Heb. rerse) of Leviathan (lwytn); you gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness.
Compare the plural "heads" of Leviathan here with the «seven heads" of Lotan in the passage from the Baal epic cited above (see more below). At this point we need to briefly turn our attention to a longstanding problem in the interpretation of the Ugaritic mythology of Yam and Leviathan. In the past, some scholars have argued that the god Yam in the Ugaritic texts was not to be identified with Leviathan and Tunnan (cf. the references to tnnyn and tnnynym in Isa. 27:1 and Ps. 74:13, respectively). Baal's battles with Yam and Leviathan in the Baal text were thought to derive from two different myths.32 The identification of the two was considered a biblical innovation. Wayne T. Pitard has laid this problem to rest in his analysis of KTU2 1.83 (RS
places: (1) Judg. 5:6, "In the days of Shamgar son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the roads were abandoned; travelers took to winding paths" (NIV); and (2) Ps. 125:5, "But those who turn aside to their own crooked ways the Lord will lead away with evildoers. Peace be upon Israel!" (NRSV). 31. See the helpful discussion in Bernhard W. Anderson, "The Slaying of the Fleeing, Twisting Serpent: Isaiah 27=1 in Context;' in Uncovering Ancient Stones: Essays in Memory of H. Neil Richardson, ed. Lewis M. Hopfe (Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1994), 3-15. 32. See the remarks on this in Pardee, 252 n. 92.
340



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
16.266).33 Lines 8-12 of this mythological or incantational text identify Yam with Tunnan through poetic parallelism. The subject of the verbal action is not completely clear from the context, but there is little doubt that it refers either to Baal or Anat. The t- prefIx of the verbal form could be either third person feminine singular or second person masculine singular in Ugaritic, as is the case also in Hebrew. This is reflected in the parenthetical variant readings inserted into the translation here:
8 tan.lsbm 9 tSt.
trks 10 Imrym. Ibnn
11 pl.tbtn.yymm 12 bmlt.ht.ynhr
She (Anat; or "you" Baal) set(s) a muzzle on Tunnan. (you) bind(s) him on the heights of Lebanon. Dried up you shall be scattered, 0 Yamm! In a tumult of panic, 0 Nahar (river)!
In this text Yam and Tunnan are clearly identifIed as the same. Tunnan is muzzled and then addressed in the vocative as Yamm/Nahar. The reason for suggesting that the subject of the action in this text could be either Baal or Anat is that the Baal myth also refers to a time when Anat defeated Leviathan on behalf of Baal. There is no actual record of the battle itself, but Anat refers to it when she speaks (KTU2 1.3 col. iii lines 38-42):
Imbst. mdd il ym. Ikit. nhr. il. rbm Iistbm. tnn. istmdh mbhst.btn. <qItn slyt.d.sb <t.rasm
Surely I smote Yam, the beloved of El; surely I fInished off Nahar, the great god; surely I bound Tunnan and destroyed him. I smote the twisted serpent, the tyrant with seven heads.
The combination of passages cited above demonstrates that Leviathan, Yam, Tunnan (Heb. tannin), and Nahar all refer to one and the same enemy of Baal in the Ugaritic material. This was not a biblical innovation. Leviathan is the twisted serpent in Mot's challenge to Baal, and Tunnan is the same as Yam in KTU21.83, so the twisted serpent in the Anat section of the Baal myth is the same as Yam, Tunnan, and Leviathan. The association of Leviathan with "the dragon" (Heb. tnnyn) who is in the "sea" (Heb. ym; cf. the Ugaritic god Yam) in Isa. 27:1 makes perfectly good sense against the backdrop of the world of the Ugaritic Baal myth. The point of all this is that in the biblical text we have clear allusions to an ancient Near Eastern myth about an evil serpent with whom Yahweh does battle.
33. Wayne T. Pitard, "The Binding of Yamm: A New Edition of the Ugaritic Text KTU 1.83," ]NES 57 (1998): 261-80.
341



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
Returning now to the main argument, we have moved from the future in Isaiah 27 to the past in Psalm 74, but how far into the past? Some have taken this passage in Psalm 74 as a reference way back to primordial times, exclusively, while others see it as a complex mixture of primordial and historical allusions.34 The next few lines seem to suggest a primordial focus:
15 You cut openings for springs and torrents; you dried up ever-flowing streams. 16 Yours is the day, yours also the night; you established the luminaries and the sun. 17 You have fixed all the bounds of the earth; you made summer and winter. (NRSV)
So do not the complex of Leviathan motifs in the previous verses also refer to primeval time? In fact, Jon D. Levenson sees Ps. 74:12-17b as "the locus classicus of the idea that the God of Israel not only defeated the Sea and its monsters, but also dismembered Leviathan altogether and then created the familiar world," reflecting not only o}l the battle between Baal and Leviathan in the Ugaritic Baal myth but also Marduk and Tiamat in the Babylonian Epic of Creation (on this Babylonian background see below).35 If the allusions in Ps. 74:12-17 are more than just primordial,36 then the lines cited above consist of a complex mixture of the same mythical cosmic battle motifs employed in Isaiah 27 with historical allusions to God's past victories on behalf of Israel. One of those was when God "divided the sea" to deliver them from the chariots of Egypt (v. 13; cf. Exodus 14-15). Some scholars today would argue that the story of deliverance from Egypt itself is mythical, but at least to the ancient Israelites it was historical and the mythological references used to depict it here in Psalm 74 highlight it as a historical event of cosmic proportions - that is, if this interpretation of Psalm 74 is correct. The
34. Marvin E. Tate, e.g., limits the application to primeval activities of God, but HansJoachim Kraus sees a mixing in of the metaphors for his work in primeval as well as historical events. Compare Tate, Psalms 51-100. WBC (Waco: Word, 1990), 250-51, with Kraus, Psalms 60150 (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1989),99-100.
35. Jon D. Levenson, Creation and the Persistence ofEvil: The Jewish Drama ofDivine Omnipotence, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994), 18; cf. 7-13, 18-19. 36. See, e.g., Nicolas Wyatt's analysis, in which he suggests that in the process of its formation into what we now have, this passage constitutes a mixture of the historical with what was originally a purely primordial recollection, in the sense that there is a link between God's original creation and his redemptive work on behalf of Israel; Myths of Power: A Study ofRoyal Myth and Ideology in Ugaritic and Biblical Tradition (Munster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1996), 163-69, esp. 165 and the reference there to Isa. 51:9-10 (cf. n. 29 above).
342



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
fact that in v. 12 the author refers to God as "my King from of old, performing salvation in the earth;' suggests that historical acts of salvation are indeed in view from the start. Moreover, in the current situation, Israel stood in need of deliverance and the psalmist called upon God as the deliverer, whether primordial or historical. The point in Psalm 74 is open to question, but the fact is that, from their own point of view, Israel's history does include the primeval days. The historical story becomes mythologized, but not fictionalized. It has been argued that "through its myth every civilization finds its own historical dimension, connecting it with the events of mythical time, which give it a permanent sacred guarantee."37 As Van Seters has observed, this is especially true in the Hebrew Bible in a way that is unprecedented in ancient Near Eastern history writing. Genesis 1-11 presents itself to us as "history;' not "myth" or "fiction;' although he would see it as historicized myth.38 The early chapters of Genesis are bound to the rest of Genesis through Kings by means of the genealogical framework that runs through the entire book and beyond. The toled6t "generations" formula that shapes and unifies the whole book of Genesis (Gen. 2:4; 5:1; 6:9; 10:1; 11:10, 27; 25:12, 19; 36:1, 9; 37:2) is continued, for example, in Ruth 4:18-22 ("generations" formula and all) with links back to Judah and Perez in Genesis 38 and forward to the books of Samuel and Kings in terms of the ancestry of David. This does not mean that the Israelites would have seen no distinction between the primeval history in Genesis 1-11 and the patriarchal and national history beginning in Genesis 12. Surely they would have recognized the difference between, on the one hand, the origins of mankind and all the nations from creation to the tower of Babel and, on the other, their own national history. The main point here, however, is that their "history writing" presents Yahweh as the one true God who stands above and outside of both the world and history. He created the world from outside of it and still stands in that transcendent position even within history. He is neither bound by nature nor determined or undermined by history. Nevertheless, Genesis 12 through 2 Kings proceeds to tell us why and how this God has committed himself by covenant bond to a particular people, Israel, who stand in a particular kind of relationship to the world. It is through them (lit., Abraham their father) that "all the families of earth shall be blessed" (Gen. 12:3b). The whole earth belongs to the Lord, but Israel is his "treasured possession;' his "kingdom of
37. Anna Maria G. Capomacchia, "Heroic Dimension and Historical Perspective in the Ancient Near East;' in Abusch et al., 91 and passim. 38. Van Seters, Prologue to History, 25-27, 188-93. See also my previous remarks on this in Averbeck, "The Sumerian Historiographic Tradition;' 92-93, 98-100, and the literature cited there.
343



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
priests;' his "holy nation" (Exod. 19:5-6). The comprehensiveness of Israel's history derives from the comprehensive sovereignty of Israel's God.
The Cosmic Battle in Genesis 1-3
The sovereignty of Yahweh over Leviathan in the Bible is part of its comprehensive presentation of the history of Israel and the world. There are actually two groups of Leviathan passages in the Hebrew Bible. One group reflects a knowledge of the ancient Near Eastern mythological analogues, but does not partake of the cosmic battle motif in any direct sense. They either ignore or react against any notion of a challenge to God's/Yahweh's sovereignty in the creation or the maintenance of the cosmos (e.g., Ps. 104:26; Job 41).39 The other group of passages uses the ancient Near Eastern repertoire of cosmic battle motifs, including Leviathan the twisted serpent, in a more engaging and interactive manner. Some of these, the major ones, have been treated above (e.g., Ps. 74:12-17; Isa. 27:1). The remainder of this essay focuses on the latter set of passages and their importance in reading Genesis 3.
History of Scholarship
A survey of the most recent scholarly literature reveals two major problems in the discussion of the cosmic battle motif. On the one hand, there has been a tendency to override the basic principle of comparative method in which it is important to give intrabiblical parallels priority over extrabiblical parallels. On the other hand, Genesis 3 has been generally taken too lightly in the scholarly treatment of the ancient Near Eastern "cosmic battle" motif. First, one of the most basic methodological rules for comparing extrabiblical ancient Near Eastern texts with the Bible is that careful analysis of the biblical passages and their intrabiblical parallels should always take precedence over comparisons with external texts. There are times in this discussion of cosmic battle passages in the Bible where this principle has been violated. For example, Bernard Batto's interpretational rendition of the Genesis 2-3 account is creatively dependent on reading the ancient Near East and especially Babylonian mythological tradition into the story. There is a ten
39. Job 3:8 reflects the same basic point, but with the emphasis upon the fact that no regular human who values life would dare to rouse Leviathan. Such a person would need to be especially brave and mighty: "Let the cursers of the day (or 'the sea') curse it (i.e., the day of Job's birth), those who stand ready to rouse Leviathan."
344



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
dency, sometimes blatant, to allow the data from the ancient Near East to overwhelm the biblical basis of the discussion or push it aside in favor of the worldviews reflected in texts outside the Bible.40 It is important to resist this temptation and, instead, allow the Hebrew Bible to carry its own weight within the conceptual world of its ancient west Asian environment. Indeed, Batto makes an important distinction between "mythopoeic" and "mythopoetic" literature.41 The former term comes from mythos "story" and poiein "making," and refers to the making of new myths or extending old ones to include new elements. This is what Batto thinks the biblical writers are doing. The term "mythopoetic," on the other hand, refers to literature in which mythological images are used but the stories themselves have lost their power. Neither of these terms, however, captures what is truly happening in the biblical references to the ancient Near Eastern myths of cosmic battle. The writers of the Hebrew Bible used the repertoire of ancient Near Eastern cosmic battle motifs and patterns to articulate certain aspects of faith and commitment to God/Yahweh in ancient Israel. They used them precisely because these stories were powerful in the conceptual world of the ancient Israelites and, therefore, provided a set of motifs that could be used to speak powerfully about Yahweh.42 In doing so, however, they were not just reusing the myths but tailored them to the distinctiveness of their belief in One God who is the creator of all and to whom Israel was to show loyalty at all cost. Second, Genesis 3 has not always been given due attention in treatments of the "cosmic battle" motif in the Bible. In fact, some of the most important works either completely ignore this chapter or underplay the relationship between Genesis 3 and the complex of cosmic battle references in the ancient Near East and the Hebrew Bible.43 Others follow and continue to develop the
40. Bernard F. Batto, Slaying the Dragon: Mythmaking in the Biblical Tradition (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1992), 44-62. E.g., because it is supposedly so in Atrahasis, the Yahwist's (Genesis 2-3) is not a story of a fall from an originally perfect creation, but of a continual improvement from the time of creation forward (45-46). In specific, e.g., as in Atrahasis, the garden of Eden was not created for the benefit of mankind, but man was created "to relieve the deity of the burden of cultivating his own plantation" (51). Examples could easily be multiplied. Now and then, Batto's readings are truly interesting and properly suggestive, but, by and large, his arguments depend on imposing the ancient Near Eastern materials from Atrahasis, Gilgamesh, Adapa, and other compositions on the biblical text in a way that overrules it. 41. Batto, 12-13. 42. See Wyatt, Myths of Power. 43. See Mary K. Wakeman, God's Battle with the Monster (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1973), 84-86, 136-38, according to whom the myth is obscured in Genesis 3; cf. also Tremper Longman III and Daniel G. Reid, God Is a Warrior (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1995), 72-74.
Susan Niditch (Chaos to Cosmos: Studies in Biblical Patterns ofCreation [Chico: Scholars,
345



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
groundbreaking work of Hermann Gunkel.44 In this scholarly tradition, on one level the serpent story in Genesis 3 is largely an etiological fable that explains the snake's mode of transport and the natural enmity between people and snakes,45 or the serpent is a magical source oflife and wisdom as, for example, in the cult of the serpent in Numbers 21 and 2 Kgs. 18:4. In that case, the Genesis 3 curses have the heathen practice of deriving higher knowledge through magic and divination as their object of concern.46 On another level, however, Gunkel also argued that behind the etiological fable in Genesis 3 lurks another tradition. There was an original mythological serpent that had demonic characteristics, but this one in Genesis 3 derives from an ancient Near Eastern tradition different from that of Tiamat in the Babylonian tradition reflected in Genesis 1. They are "separate figures" altogether.47 Moreover, the mythical foundation of the more ancient story in Genesis 3 has receded further into the background, so here we have an actual serpent rather than a serpent-demon.48 With help from the Ugaritic texts not available in Gunkel's day, other scholars have carried this interpretation forward. Brevard S. Childs, for example, argues that:
1985], 35-36) sees the serpent as "a betwixt and between creature, one appropriate for linking paradise and reality," a wise creature who introduces mankind to wisdom, the ability to distinguish between good and evil; cf. also Oral World and Written World: Ancient Israelite Literature (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1996), 28-38. Batto (59-62,96) argues, on the one hand, that the serpent was an enemy of God but not of people, since he enabled the latter to obtain a divine level of knowledge and, on the other hand, "the serpent embodied the illegitimate human aspiration to divine wisdom" (60), so by enticing mankind to overstep the boundary of know1edge that distinguished man from God, the serpent brought a curse upon all animals and humankind as well. Levenson; John Day, God's Conflict with the Dragon and the Sea (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985); and Hugh Rowland Page, Jr., The Myth ofCosmic Rebellion: A Study ofIts Reflexes in Ugaritic and Biblical Literature. VTSup 65 (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1996) completely ignore Genesis 3.
44. See Hermann Gunkel, Schopfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit: Eine religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchung tiber Gen 1 und Ap Joh 12 (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1895),3-120; and the abridged English translation by Charles A. Muenchow, "The Influence of Babylonian Mythology upon the Biblical Creation Story:' in Creation in the Old Testament, ed. Bernard W. Anderson. IRT 6 (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1984), 25-52. 45. Hermann Gunkel, Genesis (Macon: Mercer University Press, 1997), 21; Claus Westermann, Genesis 1-11 (Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1984), 260-61. Gerhard Von Rad, Genesis, rev. ed. OTL (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1972), 92-93, argues that the narrative is not just etiological but also sets forth the basic struggles that humankind has with evil. 46. See the summary of this view and the literature cited in Westermann, 237-38. 47. Gunkel, Genesis, 16. 48. Gunkel, Genesis, 15 and 39.



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
Demonic elements of a Canaanite myth were associated with the serpent who epitomized that which is sinister and strange among the animals. The Yahwist retained the demonic character of the snake arising out of the myth, but affirmed that it was a mere creature under God's power.49
The question is whether or not the serpent in Genesis 3 would have naturally called the image of Leviathan and the cosmic battle to mind for the ancient author and his readers.
Genesis 1 and Creation
The Ugaritic exemplars, or the traditions that underlie them, are by far the most fully developed of the West Semitic world, and are the most likely to have been readily available to the ancient Israelites, at least in oral form. Of course, there are also many other cosmic battle traditions that we know of from elsewhere in the ancient Near East, especially Mesopotamia. The cosmic battle motif shows amazing depth of perspective and breadth of distribution in the Fertile Crescent and in the Bible.50 There is debate over whether or not, or the degree to which, these traditions have influenced certain biblical passages. In a groundbreaking work written over 30 years before the Ugaritic texts were recovered, Gunkel argued for the incorporation of the ancient Near Eastern cosmic battle myth into the Bible from the story about Marduk versus Tiamat in the Babylonian Creation Epic (Enuma Elish). Since then much of the scholarly debate has revolved around a supposed cosmic battle in Genesis 1. Genesis 3 has seldom entered into the discussion in a significant way.51
49. Brevard S. Childs, Myth and Reality in the Old Testament, 2nd ed. SBT 27 (London: SCM, 1962), 49. 50. See now the helpful collection of data and discussion in Nicolas Wyatt, "Arms and the King: The Earliest Allusions to the ChaoskamPfMotif and Their Implications for the Interpretation of the Ugaritic and Biblical Traditions;' in "Und Mose schrieb dieses Lied auf": Studien zum Alten Testament und zum Alten Orient, ed. Manfried Dietrich and Ingo Kottsieper. AOAT 250 (Mi.inster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1998), 833-82. See also F. A. M. Wiggermann, "Transtigridian Snake Gods;' in Sumerian Gods and Their Representations, ed. I. L. Finkel and M. J. Geller. Cuneiform Monographs 7 (Groningen: STYX, 1997), 33-55. The cosmic battle motif is found in literature and iconography from the 3rd to the 1st millennium B.C.E., and in virtually every corner of the ancient Near Eastern world, to one degree or another. On the iconography, see now Martin Klingbeil, Yahweh Fighting from Heaven: God as Warrior and as God of Heaven in the Hebrew Psalter and Ancient Near Eastern Iconography. aBO 169 (Freiburg: University-Verlag, 1999)·
51. See Gunkel, Schopfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit and the abridged English translation by Muenchow.
347



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
Gunkel himself argued that "a fragment of a cosmogonic myth is preserved in Genesis 1," that "Genesis 1 is not the free composition of an author but is rather the deposit of a tradition" (emphasis his), and that "this tradition must stretch back to high antiquity."52 He concluded that, in light of the background of all the other allusions to the cosmic battle in scripture (e.g., Rahab, Leviathan, Behemoth, the Dragon in the Sea, and Tannin), "ultimately, Genesis 1 is also of Babylonian origin."53 There are those who still follow this basic line of argument. Batto, for example, is fully committed to it, with refinements and expansions from Atrahasis, the Baal myth, and other ancient Near Eastern texts discovered since Gunkel. He argues that Genesis 1 retains reminiscences of the belief that God created us and our world through defeating the great sea monster known elsewhere in the Bible and the ancient Near East as Leviathan, Yam, Tannun; and Tiamat (cf. tehom in Gen. 1:2).54 Others hold to an alternate form of this view. For example, even some scholars who reject the notion of myth in Genesis 1because of their conservative view of Scripture, nevertheless argue that Gen. 1:2 refers to a chaotic state that is unformed and unfilled because of the ravages of the fall of Satan. According to this view, Genesis 1:3 begins an account of God's re-creation of the world, which was his first redemptive act.55 Still others reject the cosmic battle interpretation of Genesis 1 altogether, including the notion that there are such traditions lying behind the current text. Claus Westermann, for example, reviews Gunkel's hypothesis and more recent elaborations of it in some detail. He concludes that, "for the most part it is quite clear that the victory over the monster of Chaos has nothing to do with creation" in Genesis 1.56 Even in regard to the parade example of tehom (cf. "Tiamat" in Enuma Elish) and other terms in Gen. 1:2, he argues:
We can be certain then that Gen 1:2 belongs to a history of creation narratives in which the motif of the primeval deep, with or without darkness, very often represents the situation before creation, but that the link between creation and the struggle of the gods is not part ofits pre-history.57
52. Gunkel, "The Influence of Babylonian Mythology," 26 and 3l. 53. Gunkel, "The Influence of Babylonian Mythology," 47 (cf. 35-37). 54. Batto, 73-84.
55. See, e.g., Allen P. Ross, Creation and Blessing: A Guide to the Study and Exposition of the Book of Genesis (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1988), 106-7. 56. Westermann, 33· 57. Westermann, 106 (italics mine). He argues that it is not just a matter of the current text not holding to or reacting against the ancient Near Eastern cosmic battle motif, but this does not even lie behind the text in its prehistory. This flies directly in the face of Gunkel's argument that the prehistory of the text of Genesis 1 is found primarily in the Babylonian myth. See



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
The fact of the matter is that there is no serpentine sea monster in Genesis I, no hint of cosmic battle either, nor the supposed devastations of Satan. The great sea creatures known as tnnynym (see Ugar. tunnan in some of the texts cited above) are created on day five along with all the other water animals (1:21). They raise no challenge to God. The term tehom "deep" in v. 2 is cognate to the goddess Tiamat who did battle with Marduk in the Babylonian Creation Epic, but this tehom is not personal and expresses no resistance to God's creative activity. Even if this is a shrouded allusion to Tiamat or a reflection on ancient Near Eastern traditions that lie behind the Tiamat motif in Bnuma Blish,58 nevertheless, this has the same effect as the reference to the tnnynym in Gen. 1:21. Tehom/Tiamat raises no challenge to God or his creative work. Similarly, tahCt and hahCt "formless and empty" yield no resistance, but are treated simply as the conditions into which God spoke his creative word. The term hahCt occurs only two other times in the Hebrew Bible, both with tahCt. Jeremiah 4:23 describes the earth as "formless and empty" and the heavens as having no light in the day when the Lord judges Judah and Jerusalem. Similarly, Isa. 34:11 refers to God's day of vengeance on Edom when he will «stretch out over Edom the measuring line of chaos (tahCt) and the plumb line of desolation (hahCtl' (NIV). TahCt is used in other contexts of this sort as well (see esp. Deut. 32:10; Job 6:18; 12:24; 26:7; PS.107:4o; Isa. 24:10; 45:18-19). The most interesting one is Isa. 45:18-19:
18 For thus says the LORD, who created the heavens (he is God!), who formed the earth and made it (he established it; he did not create it a chaos [tahCt; i.e., waste land], he formed it to be inhabited!): I am the Lord, and there is no other. 19 I did not speak in secret, in a land of darkness;
also the very helpful review of the history of scholarship and helpful discussion in Gordon J. Wenham, Genesis 1-15. WBC 1 (Waco: Word, 1987), 8-17, and secondary literature cited there. 58. Gunkel was right, there is no article on tehOm in Gen. 1:2, suggesting that perhaps this is more than simply a term for the deep; "The Influence of Babylonian Mythology;' 26. But see the careful analysis of tehOm in the Old Testament in Westermann, 104-5, where he argues that there is no personification of tehOm in the Hebrew Bible even though it has no article in all but two of its 35 occurrences. See also W. G. Lambert, "A New Look at the Babylonian Background of Genesis;' ITS 16 (1965): 287-300.
349



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
I did not say to the offspring of Jacob, "Seek me in chaos (t6hCt; i.e., waste land)." I the LORD speak the truth, I declare what is right. (NRSV)
Here the Lord is talking about delivering Israel eternally so that they will not be ashamed any longer (v. 17). In the end they will be justified and glorified (v. 25). God did not create the world to be a place of uninhabitable chaos (t6hCt) and neither did he call Israel to seek him in such a place. There will be a restoration of Israel, a recovery from the t6hCt and darkness of judgment and exile.59 As noted above, some have argued that these references should be taken as evidence that the condition of the world in Gen. 1:2 was not just formless, empty, and dark in the sense that God had not yet finished his creative activity. Instead, it refers to the devastation caused by a previous battle between God and the great evil serpent, or it bears a dim reflection of the ancient Near Eastern myth about the cosmic battle creation motif that underlies the account. After all, the biblical passages just cited above certainly see this t6hu wab6hCt condition as something brought about by rebellion against God and God's response to that rebellion in the present creation. It is indeed true that, according to Genesis 1, God progressively through the six creation days eliminated the totally dark and watery unformed and unfilled conditions of v. 2. Moreover, darkness, as opposed to light, is often used as a metaphor for evil or catastrophe in Scripture, including some of the passages cited above. However, in Genesis 1 God progressively pronounces that what he has made is "good;' and then final "very good" (v. 31). To argue that the darkness here stands for a state of destruction caused by evil is, in my opinion, an instance of "illegitimate totality transfer."60 Westermann is correct. The point of v. 2 is to provide a starting point for God's creative activity that the ancient Israelites could understand. In their ancient Near Eastern world numerous creation accounts from Mesopotamia and Egypt began with a deep dark watery abyss. In these texts this condition is seen as uncreated but not evil. For example, at the beginning of Enuma Elish (= "when on high," a
59. See the discussion of tOhU wabohtt in David Toshio Tsumura, The Earth and the Waters in Genesis 1 and 2. JSOTSup 83 (Sheffield: JSOT, 1989), 17-43. 60. "Illegitimate totality transfer" occurs when meanings and/or implications of terms and expressions from various other contexts are illegitimately piled together and forced upon a context where the argument does not call for it. See James Barr, The Semantics of Biblical Language (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), 218, and all the books written since then on the hermeneutics and especially biblical word usage and definition.
350



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
temporal beginning similar to bere'sit "In the beginning" or "When (God) began;' Gen. 1:1) this point of departure carries no evil meaning or implication, even though Tiamat is on the scene. Instead, the watery abyss conditions provide the starting matrix for creation:
When on high no name was given to heaven, Nor below was the netherworld called by name, Primeval Apsu was their progenitor, And matrix-Tiamat was she who bore them all, They were mingling their waters together....61
A theogony follows. The battle between the forces of evil and good associated with creation does not come into play until later in Enuma Elish, when Marduk defeats the enraged Tiamat and creates heaven and earth out of her corpse (Tablets IV-V). The original conditions are treated neither as inherently evil nor reflective of cosmic battle imagery. Moreover, even in the Ugaritic Baal myth one would be hard pressed to show that Baal's battle with Leviathan had anything at all to do with the creation of the world. The same is true in Genesis 1-3. Genesis 1, of course, does not include a theogony, and this is part of the underlying polemic against the ancient Near Eastern environment of the Israelites. This polemic, it seems to me, also includes a reaction against the notion that God created the world by defeating the evil forces of chaos. Instead, the evil forces of chaos appear in the Bible as an attack on God's holiness and authority in an already created world. The closest link to the Leviathan motif in early Genesis is the account in chapter 3 of the serpent-led temptation and corruption of mankind in the garden of Eden.
Genesis 3 and the Cosmic Battle
The fact of the matter is that there is more to the serpent in Genesis 3 than has generally been recognized. As the discussion above on the parallels between poetic texts in the Hebrew Bible and the mythological ideas and motifs expressed in the Ugaritic Baal myth demonstrates, the theme of a cosmic battle between God and a serpentine monster bent on evil and destruction was alive and well in ancient Israel. The narrative in Genesis 3 is relatively subtle as compared to some of the poetic texts, but to the Israelites the message was anything but subtle precisely because of their awareness of the theme and its
61. Benjamin Foster, "Epic of Creation (l.l11)," in COS 1:391, Tablet I lines 1-5, the very beginning of the composition, as in Gen. 1:1-2.
351



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
significance for their understanding of their God, Yahweh, and his involvement in their lives and their national history. There is a shift in genre here, and it is natural that the allusions to the cosmic battle in biblical poetic texts would be closer in kind to those found in the Ugaritic poetry than those of the prose narrative account in Genesis 3. Nevertheless, the prose narrative account in Genesis 3 makes full use of this mythological background in the sense that the writer depends on the readers' (or hearers') awareness of it as it is expressed in biblical and/or extrabiblical intertextual parallels.62 The "heads" of Leviathan referred to in Ps. 74:14 (cf. also v. 13) are of particular interest here. Genesis 3:15 refers to the seed of the woman crushing the "head" of the serpent. The same word for "serpent" (Heb. niibiis; Gen. 3:14) is used as as in Isa. 27:1. More than that, Ps. 74:14 has God crushing (r??, admittedly not swp as in Gen. 3:15) "the heads of Leviathan." The "crushing" of the serpent's head in Gen. 3:15 is conspicuous in light of these parallels.63 Also, once again Hebrew tnnyn "dragon," which is the same as Ugaritic tunnan, occurs in poetic parallel with Leviathan, and Ps. 74:13 refers to God as the king who "divided the sea (Heb. ym; cf. Ugar. Yam) by his might" and "broke the heads of the dragons (Heb. tnnynym; cf. sg. tnnyn in Isa. 27:1) in the waters." In Psalm 74, all of this is in the context of God "performing deliverances (Heb. yesu'6t) in the midst of the earth" (v. 12). The vitality of the serpent motif in Genesis 3 for the ancient Israelites arose from the very fact that they would have identified this particular primeval scene with the origin of the real battle, the cosmic one. They would have seen it as more than a simple etiological fable about snakes or a polemic against divination, or whatever. It was not just a snake story to them. The fact of the matter is that this is the first appearance of a serpent in the canonical Hebrew Bible. We must not lose track of this point amid all the historical critical debate surrounding the composition of the book of Genesis. Moreover, this serpent issued a direct challenge to the Lord's truthfulness and authority (Gen. 3:1-5), and the Lord responded with a curse that involved crushing the serpent's "head."64 In light of all this, it seems eminently reasonable to assume that the Is
62. For a helpful discussion of intertextuality as it relates to the Leviathan serpent motif, see Elaine A. Phillips, "Serpent Intertexts: Tantalizing Twists in the Tales," BBR 10 (2000): 233-45. 63. On the verb rendered here "crush,'1 see the remarks in Wenham, 79-81; and Westermann, 259-60. 64. Johannes C. de Moor's rendition and interpretation of two Ugaritic incantation texts against snakebite suggests even more interesting parallels between the snake tradition in Genesis 3 and the whole of the Genesis 2-3 Eden narrative; "East of Eden," ZAW100 (1988): 105-11. In light of the extreme difficulty of these texts, however, one wonders how reliable some of his interpretations and comparative applications are.
35 2



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
raelites would have seen a great deal more in Genesis 3 than a simple tale about snakes and mankind. This was the great serpent, the archenemy of Yahweh and the people of God. From their point of view, this would have been the very beginning of a cosmic battle that they were feeling the effects of in their own personal experience (see the curses that follow) and their national history. Psalm 89 comes at the same point in a different way, as a praise to God for his faithfulness. Verse 8 says:
8 0 LORD God Almighty, who is like you? You are mighty, 0 LORD, and your faithfulness surrounds you.
The Psalm continues (vv. 9-13):
9 You rule over the surging sea; when its waves mount up, you still them. 10 You crushed Rahab like one of the slain; with your strong arm you scattered your enemies. 11 The heavens are yours, and yours also the earth; you founded the world and all that is in it. 12 You created the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon sing for joy at your name. 13 Your arm is endued with power; your hand is strong, your right hand exalted. (NIV)
Rahab here probably refers to Egypt. Consider, for example, Isa. 30:7, "Egypt's help is worthless and empty, therefore I have called her, 'Rahab who sits still'" (NRSV). Psalm 104, on the other hand, refers to Leviathan in an altogether different light. Verses 24-26 say:
24 0 LORD, how manifold are your works! In wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of your creatures. 25 Yonder is the sea, great and wide, creeping things innumerable are there, living things both small and great. 26 There go the ships, and Leviathan that you formed to sport in it. (NRSV)
Here Leviathan is treated as a sea monster that challenges the Lord not at all. He is like the great tnnynym of Genesis 1:21.
353



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
The point is that biblical writers could use these motifs in various ways, depending on the point being made in the context. In Psalm 104 the creation without opposition perspective of Genesis 1 comes through forcefully. In Psalm 74 the Baal myth battle motif is used to call upon God to be the divine warrior for Israel in their current dilemma. The key in Psalm 74 seems to be that God is "King" (v. 12) and needs to exert his kingship in the world on behalf of Israel. The fact of the matter is that the Baal myth seems to have nothing to do with creation of the world. The concern there, as in Psalm 74, is with kingship.65 This helps to make sense of the historical and perhaps also primeval perspectives on Yahweh's kingship. If the Leviathan motif in Psalm 74 is taken as an allusion to creation, it should be understood as an elaborate mythological way of talking about the whole narrative in Genesis 1-3. Genesis 3, in fact, is included in the time of creation by its readily apparent connection back to Genesis 2. There are not two views of creation in Genesis 1 and 2-3 just two different ways of articulating it. Both see God as the sovereign king, but only the latter expresses it in terms of cosmic battle. From the point of view of the shape of the text, the serpent was the first to raise an explicit challenge to God in the Bible, and this happened in Genesis 3. The challenge, and so also the battle between God and the serpent, is actually over mankind. People are the battleground - the "territory" under dispute - and the central concern of this battle of the ages has as much to do with people as with the great serpent. Both mankind and serpent "fell" out of favor with God here, so the battle rages between all three. We stand right in the middle of a ferocious cosmic fray. Ancient Israel's preservation - and ours, believe it or not - depends on Yahweh's willingness to redeem us in the midst of this brawl. The apocalyptic vision is that there will come a day when God will bring all this to final resolution by making an end of the "twisted serpent" of old. One could, of course, follow the main theme of this essay through the intertestamental period and into the New Testament (e.g., Revelation 12), but that is a story for another time and another place.
Conclusion
Those who know the texts will be aware that I have only scratched the surface of the evil serpent myths that could be referred to. We have considered some of the most important ones but, for example, we have said nothing of the ser
65. See the special emphasis on this point as it is developed in Smith, The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, 59-60, 96-114.
354



Ancient Near Eastern Mythography
pent that stole the plant that rejuvenates life from Gilgamesh at the end of the flood story in the Gilgamesh Epic tablet 11. From Anatolia we have Iluyanka, the evil serpent in Hittite myth, and from Egypt the story of the repulsing of the dragon, in which Seth binds the serpent «who goes on his belly" and then runs off with his strength. Nevertheless, what we have considered has some important implications that need consideration. Modern biblical scholars have often voiced complaints about the exegesis of the church that imposes elaborate theories about Satan on the text in Genesis 3. This is understandable. In my opinion, however, they have overreacted in two ways. First, with Terence E. Fretheim and others,66 I maintain that, as it stands in the canonical text, Genesis 3 is indeed a «fall" narrative, a «falling out" with God on the part of the serpent and humankind. Second, many have failed to take seriously the ancient Near Eastern Israelite awareness of cosmic battle mythology as the conceptual world for the reading or hearing of Genesis 3 in that day. In any case, different scholars will have different views of the truthvalue these passages in the Bible have for history, theology, and for their own faith or worldview. This is to be expected. One of the points I have labored to make here is that, no matter what one believes about the historicity of the Bible and its claims to truth, the way forward in the study of the relationship among history, theology, and ancient Near Eastern myth in the Bible is through reading myth as analogical thinking about history and reality. We are not talking about some kind of alternative truth system, but a different way of talking about what was and is in fact true, historically and experientially. Moreover, the use of ancient Near Eastern mythological stories or motifs in the Hebrew Bible cannot be treated in a monolithic way. The writers used them in different ways for manifold purposes in numerous places without any sense of inconsistency. No doubt various (groups of) readers would have had different views regarding the truth of the original myths and even the truth of biblical faith and history. In any case, the problem of evil associated with the use of the Leviathan mythological complex in the Bible cannot be ignored. Some of us may want to distance ourselves in one way or another, to one degree or another, from the presentation of these biblical stories as historical. But we still have analogies for them today, whether they are more historical than fictional, such as Hitler, or more fictional than historical, such as the evil emperor of Star Wars fame. Even the fictional characterization of the latter is based on cultural historical perceptions of the embodiment of evil
66. See, e.g., Terence E. Fretheim, "Is Genesis 3 a Fall Story?" WW 14 (1994): 144-53.
355



RICHARD E. AVERBECK
that rise to prominence, for example, in the wicked witch of the Wizard of Oz and her human counterpart in the nasty old neighbor lady, right down to the evil laugh. As it turns out, then, the ancients were on to something important with their mythology, and the biblical writers took advantage of it. The more we realize this, the more likely we are to understand what was going on for them in life, its correspondence to important issues in our own experience of life, and how we should handle this kind of material as scholars. Yes, sometimes the truth really is stranger than fiction.
356



The Future ofBiblical Archaeology
REASSESSING METHODOLOGIES AND ASSUMPTIONS
The Proceedings of a Symposium
August 12-14, 2001
at Trinity International University
Edited by
James K. Hoffmeier & Alan Millard
UNIVE:RSiTY
2 ""-,,,,,= H' A C F' nf','f ''-'''' 'D
.1 l . ,.' ..•..
-., 'J... , $.". 1.• ,""" f. J'>\
WILLIAM B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING COMPANY
GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN / CAMBRIDGE, U.K.



© 2004 Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. All rights reserved
Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. 255 Jefferson Ave. S.E., Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503 / P.O. Box 163, Cambridge CB3 9PU U.K.
Printed in the United States of America
08 07 06 05 04 7 6 543 21
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The future of biblical archaeology: reassessing methodologies and assumptions: the proceedings of a symposium, August 12-14, 2001 at Trinity International University / edited by James K. Hoffmeier & Alan Millard. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references. ISBN 0-8028-2173-1 (pbk.: alk. paper) 1. Bible - Antiquities - Congresses. I. Hoffmeier, James Karl, 1951II. Millard, A. R. (Alan Ralph)
BS621.F88 2004 22043 - dC22
www.eerdmans.com
2004047168