---
master_file: "[[@StMichaelLeyLinepdf]]"
---
# Index for St.Michael Ley Line.pdf

St.Michael Ley Line
spanglefish.com/kingarthur/index.asp
These topics initially seem to be so disparate and unconnected, that any relation between them appears scant and impossible to establish with any degree of certainty. However, it is the aim of this enquiry to show how inextricably linked these diverse questions are. This site will show how the many pieces of a puzzle that have hitherto been unconnected, hidden, deliberately obscured, ignored, misunderstood, or even inadvertently lost over time..... can be resolved into one conclusive body of evidence. The unconventional reading on this web site is heavy going and there is sometimes a need to repeat information already known to some readers, which to others is necessary for a step by step orderly account which leads to a revelation that will astound even the casual reader. Whatever the readers background or discipline, or by whatever chance you have been prompted to read this information, this examination of diverse material, seemingly unconnected, actually disentangles a few mysteries and makes discoveries that will have global ramifications. There are many references to old texts, but where the pre-comceptions of modern scholastic endeavour has previously failed to piece together evidence, we hope that the reader will be convinced by the connections made in this exposé.
The Saint Michael Ley line is the line that Melkin the Prophet is saying should be bifurcated at Avebury (within the stone circle SPERULIS). 104 nautical miles at an angle of 13 degrees(SPERULATIS), one will find the Island of Avalon where Joseph of Arimathea is buried. This Island presently known as Burgh Island in Devon was named by Melkin as Avalon and depicted in the Perlesvaus as a tidal Island next to a valley. The confirmation that we have located the resting place of Joseph of Arimathea is found in evidence given by Father William Good who says that 'Joseph is carefully hidden in Montacute'. As one can see, the line Melkin has indicated through his geometrical instructions, (once decoded), goes right through St. Michaels hill Montacute and leads to the Island of Avalon.
1/11



Avebury stone circle within which the St. Michael line and the Joseph line bifurcate as we are instructed by Melkin.
Chapter 1
Neolithic sites and the network of St.Michael churches on the saint Michael line.
The St. Michael Ley Line runs from the hill fort near Land’s End called Carn Les Boel to a town on the coast in East Anglia called Hopton on Sea. It keeps a steady rhumb line for 364.50 land miles across southern Britain. Although it is described as a line, many researchers have plotted it and linked up its features by excluding some points along its track and including others, or including all.
We should point out that the essence of the line is Serpentine in nature, although plotted on a map it seems straight. It actually weaves it's way across the countryside. The line is 316.74 Nautical miles long and skirts past several nodal points that have been manufactured, with such surveying precision, by Neolithic man. It is called the St Michael's Ley Line due to its features that are shown in figure 1.
The point to make here is that it is doubtful that the churches that were built along the line were all dedicated to St. Michael by coincidence. There are many places which are named after St. Michael that lie exactly upon its axis. Several churches or chapels were built along the line from the early thirteen hundreds onwards, with the St. Michael dedication. However other churches not on the St. Michael ley line have a distinct relationship to this line. We will investigate further, later on, as to why these chapels and churches seemed to have been erected by organized design in such a short period of time.
2/11



Figure 1. Showing the St. Michael’s Ley Line.
The most fundamental point to make about the St. Michael Ley line is the fact that many of its features, although not dedicated to St. Michael are in fact sacred sites and nodal points from the Neolithic culture which existed in Britain from as far back as 5000 years ago. Assuming that many of the ancient Neolithic sites have had modern era temples such as churches built upon them, it is hard to understand how on this particular line, the preponderance has been to name them after St. Michael.
The probability that so many sites occur by coincidence having the St. Michael name in one alignment are small. We must assume that it is by design and we will discover why and by whom these churches were built. However, we must assume that the underlying arcane knowledge of what exists on this line, might explain such a modern usurpation by the church builders. The fact that St. Michael dedicated churches were placed on a Neolithic construction should make us investigate other St. Michael churches not normally associated with this Ley Line. If these follow a similar pattern, then one can only assume that whoever put them there must have had some understanding of the original 'raison d'être' of the line (or the features on it) that were constructed by Neolithic man. How this Neolithic line was recognised or the knowledge of its existence permeated down from the Neolithic culture to the thirteen hundreds is uncertain. Has this knowledge of function of the original Neolithic construction been lost since the St. Michael churches were built?
3/11



People react and sense the forces of nature that interact with their daily lives in different ways and on different levels. In the book the ‘Sun and the Serpent’, Hamish Miller and Paul Broadhurst investigated the entire St. Michael's Ley Line, plotting its interwoven energy course, as it criss-crosses the rhumb line. They did so by dowsing, but many skeptics feel that there is no substance to this form of enquiry and dismiss the use of this technique.
However, we shall see shortly, that this line exists and is no figment of the imagination, but who put it there and what is its purpose? Two thousand years ago, a body was entombed within this Ley system, and has lain undiscovered upon the British landscape, much as a Pharaoh would have been laid in a pyramid specially built for him. Two thousand years ago, the same technology as the pyramid builders used was understood in Britain and yet it is not comprehended today. Between 450-750AD a monk lived named Melkin, who knew of the Ley lines existence and left us clues in a Latin riddle that will lead us to the uncovering of this hidden tomb.
Insula auallonis auida funere paganorum, pre ceteris in orbe ad sepulturam eorum omnium sperulis propheciae vaticinantibus decorata, & in futurum ornata erit altissimum laudantibus. Abbadare, potens in Saphat, paganorum nobilissimus, cum centum et quatuor milibus domiicionem ibi accepit. Inter quos ioseph de marmore, ab Armathia nomine, cepit sompnum perpetuum; Et iacet in linea bif urcata iuxta meridlanum angulum oratorii, cratibus praeparatis, super potentem adorandam virginem, supradictis sperulatis locum habitantibus tredecim. Habet enim secum Ioseph in sarcophago duo fassula alba & argentea, cruore prophete Jhesu & sudore perimpleta. Cum reperietur ejus sarcofagum, integrum illibatum in futuris videbitur, & erit apertum toto orbi terrarium. Ex tunc aqua, nec ros coeli insulam nobilissimam habitantibus poterit deficere. Per multum tempus ante diem Judioialem in iosaphat erunt aperta haec, & viventibus declarata.
4/11



Figure 1a Showing Stonehenge, one of the nodal points on the Ley system.
We can assume that the builders of Avebury, Silbury Hill, Stonehenge, Glastonbury Tor, to name but a few, were not trying to beautify the landscape. They were involved in building a network, the use of which is unfathomable, but the monk who wrote the Latin riddle above knew what had certain knowledge of the presence of the Ley network before any of the churches were built. It is unlikely that a monument such as Stonehenge, even though it is aligned to coincide with known certain celestial events, (this probably being a part of its functionality), has no other function than to act as a calendar or ceremonial temple, as many believe. There are approximately 1000 stone circles upon the British landscape and similar to the Menhirs and monoliths dotted around, these would seem to have a function more than that of a modern day church or cathedral, wherein religious rites and ceremonies are practiced. It is estimated that around four million man-hours went into the construction of Stonehenge alone, which might seem a disproportionally large investment of a groups resources, when one could simply erect markers to track a heavenly body or watch nature unfold seasonally rather than invest so much to build a calendar. The proponents of the calendar hypothesis seem to have been content with this idea, for the great importance that is attached to those much later pyramid building cultures of South America, the Mayans and the Aztecs, who both designed calendars. Those who advocate that stone circles are for ceremonial purposes, clearly find them synonymous with the sacred cathedrals of a much later age because the cathedrals of the Gothic age were similarly designed according to mathematical harmonies for the population’s spiritual refreshment or wellbeing. It has recently been discovered by an archaeological investigator, that there was an original Stonehenge called Bluehenge which was constructed with an arrangement of ‘bluestones’, that were later moved to form part of the present Stonehenge circle with its trilithons and Sarsen stones. It is unlikely that ancient man, who had a knowledge ofpi, Fibonacci and Golden mean math, including many other mathematical formulae, would have underutilized his time, on an artwork removing stones from Preseli in Wales, more than 100 miles away, unless they carried out a specific function for him. Avebury the largest stone circle in Europe lies precisely on the St. Michael Ley Line and also carries out a similar function. The briefest investigation into the construction of Avebury will find that within its seemingly crude rough stoned outline, lies an array of complex geometry that utilized precise surveying techniques. The Babylonians were the first to become interested in the extent to which planets and their alignments influenced their lives. They constructed star maps so that they might foretell what was to happen to them in the future. This has come down to us in a much misunderstood form, as our modern day horoscope. Those who live in tidal areas are well aware of the power that the moon asserts, and the influence it has on the people that live in those communities. They witness the awesome ebb and flow by an imperceptible force, yet coastal communities arrange their days around the tide. The sun has the greatest influence over our lives and from many of these stone circles where the sun rises or sets there are pertinent features upon the landscape such as hills or 5/11



dips that coincide with the sun’s cycle and it is thought that if one were to stand at Carn les Boel (the southern extent) the sun would rise on the 8th of May along the St. Michael line, the spring festival of St. Michael. Beltaine is considered a cross-quarter day, marking the midpoint in the Sun's progress between the spring equinox and summer solstice. The astronomical date for this midpoint is closer to 5 May or 7 May, but the St. Michael line is often referred to as the Beltaine line and we shall come to its connection to Bel further on. Unquestionably most of the stone circles across Britain are aligned astronomically to record the movement of a heavenly body, star group or planet. The stone circles alignments can either be noting the rising or setting of different planets or recording their oscillations and cyclical periods in the heavens. This can be understood in terms of men being able to predict future events and being cognisant of their place in time. The subject of Time and man’s understanding of it seems to be partly the reason that most of the stone circles are astrologically aligned and this subject we will leave until it incorporates with the rest of our enquiry. The fact that Ley lines interconnect these Neolithic sites as witnessed in the St. Michael line and there is a perceptible force that emanates along these lines and at stone circles seems also to connect them by an earth bound energy that these planetary bodies have an influence upon. The question is... whether modern day man is unaware and yet affected by the unseen influences and alignments around him, much the same as he is unaware of the moon's gravitational pull. So how should we search for the possible existence of unseen energies within the stone circles and along Ley lines and what influence if any could it have on us? For some, dowsing is the answer, but others don’t regard it as scientific, though an attuned dowser can often find what is there, whereas science has not come up with a way to measure it yet! This network of standing stones and Ley Line's that interconnect and interweave between, mumps, barrows, tumuli, cairns, dolmens, stone circles and large earthworks, erected from the early to the late Neolithic period, have been placed by early man in such a fashion and design, for a perceived effect they have on him. Maybe we can understand this as affecting what one might call his spiritual nature and possibly this is related to his thought patterns. Certainly, this Monk called Melkin who understood arcane knowledge and who knew of the St. Michael’s Ley line long before it even had that appellation..... leads one to believe that somehow these stone circles connect man to his future. This is in fact alluded to by Melkin in his prophecy. In the past ancient man’s utility of these circles is evident by their prolific appearance throughout the British Isles and Europe during the Neolithic period. Over the last 5000 years, man's increasing ability to intellectualize rather than work on a more intuitive basis, seems to have rendered the design of less importance, just as our churches today are underutilized. For many it is difficult to intellectualize God but Melkin, not only had an understanding of a Divine plan but also had a definite knowledge of Ley lines and by inference links these lines and circles to future events. Perhaps as many as three quarters of the globe intuitively feel God’s presence and believe in something that they cannot fully comprehend. However, over intellectualization contrarily to man’s intuitive nature can often be witnessed in those ardent non-believers......by the first words that pass their lips in disaster, which shows a conscious denial of what is subconsciously assumed and this across all the cultures, cannot be put down to a mere expression. Cave paintings in France are artistic evidence that 25,000 years ago Man yearned to understand and portray his place amongst other creatures well before the mini ice age. So what transpired 6000 years ago to cause man’s exponential rise..... (from having thought patterns similar to those of the cave painter), to reach the modern day ability to contemplate abstract potential that has led to the complexities of modern Man’s achievements? The question that keeps appearing in our enquiry is; apart from painting and sculpture, how was an idea passed on when the earliest form of writing was approximately 5000 years ago? The story of the Bible from Adam and Eve, followed by the flood, through Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, the Prophets and to Jesus, has much to do with this question, as it seems to cover the time span within which we are confining our investigation. The Bible tries at least allegorically, to answer man’s quest for a sense of provenance. Since there are no written records, the Bible attempts to span a void and provide explanation and links a time 6000 years ago to today. The bible relates an account of the interaction by a God through a divine plan which affects man’s potential. How his devises have affected modern man’s potential will be covered in a later chapter.
6/11



Figure 1b Showing the three stone circles in Cornwall called ‘The Hurlers’ situated on the Neolithic St. Michael Ley line but this site has no monument to St. Michael.
It is interesting to ponder upon the origins or precursor of what could have been a similar system to what has eventually evolved into our present-day Ley system. Just how old, how big and who conceived of the benefits, that this system would afford a Neolithic population. Approximately 6000 years ago with the eventual flooding of the English Channel.... did part of a much older system that employed tors, hills, prominent rock outcrops and islands gradually get submerged. Has the flooding of Lyonesse caused a repair to be made of what was once a single intertwined entity that may have had connections in continental Europe? As we shall see shortly the St. Michael sites that have usurped the Neolithic sites which were part of this much older system are surely aligned. Is this in some way analogous with the ‘Jerusalem that was builded here’ that Blake alludes to in his nationalistic hymn; built by our ancient forefathers, and yet more recently built upon by persons who understood the benefits of its construction? Are the Satanic mills referred to in the hymn, the manmade earthworks, and mumps positioned with a surveyors precision, upon England's green and pleasant land? It is one of the objectives of this enquiry to elucidate to the reader the interconnectedness of what is potentially part of a huge ancient functioning system and its relevance in the present era. Who was it in the modern era and which organised body realised that some planned out design is still extant on the British landscape? Did the later designers of the 1300s who built on top of the very locations on which ancient man had built his design, know of its function and have knowledge of its effect upon the inhabitants of Britain?
7/11



Figure 2 Showing Glastonbury Tor situated on the St. Michael Ley line, one of many Hill top St. Michael dedicated sites.
Was the mechanism that ancient man tapped into, still functioning when their locations were taken over by modern church builders? The St. Michael churches which are perched on hilltops, in the western part of England, which were part of an older design, seem to confirm that at least in the 1300’s the Neolithic network was perceived to be still functioning. As in the construction of many of the beautiful Gothic cathedrals that adorn some of the oldest British cities, a long period of time from start to finish for every one of these endeavours was encountered. Unlike the comparative simple construction of a church, the multitude of skills required over a timespan of around 250 years, brought about the establishment of Masonic societies that built these edifices. These societies understood a body of knowledge that was passed down from generation to generation so that these long periods of construction could be accomplished by applying complex rules and designs that, were beyond the capabilities of any individual. Stonehenge was created in similar circumstances but over a far longer period of time. It has been relocated and refined over a period of 1500 years, before there was any written word. How then did they convey the knowledge of the geometric theorems, acquired astrological records and the details of a preconceived design, from one generation to the next, over such long periods. There is a vast interwoven set of megalithic sites from Northern Europe all the way up through Scotland and the Orkney’s. Before the flooding of the English Channel, stretching as far as the body of the now submerged land that extended further than the Scilly Isles, it is possible that this network of Ley Line's that is interwoven upon the British landscape, existed and connected through the now flooded plain of a land known as Lyonesse? So, to carry out the construction of this huge interconnected network, arcane knowledge of the positioning of heavenly bodies, complex mathematics and surveying techniques were surely known. Not only did this information have to be tabulated but correlated and handed down, before any design could be put into construction. It is safe to assume that the body of knowledge to accomplish all of these tasks would have been secreted amongst the privileged few, but the Masons who built our cathedrals and the Templars who built an array of St. Michael churches upon old Neolithic sacred sites, understood a body of far older knowledge with intended aims, which we will uncover during this enquiry. To bring to fruition and complete such a project, not only did it need
8/11



the knowledge and purpose as it did in Neolithic times, but in the 1300’s it also needed the wherewithal. Before we implicate the Templars of having a hand in the construction of a network of churches in southern England..... (supposedly after they had been dispersed and merged into the Hospitallers), suffice it to say that even with modern day democratic governments often the real power lurks discreetly in the shadows. The Templar’s agenda was evolving and taking place undiscovered behind the front of an organisation that appeared as the Knights of Christ and protectors of the holy city.
Saint Michael Ley lines
The Saint Michael Ley line is the line that Melkin the Prophet is saying should be bifurcated at Avebury (within the stone circle SPERULIS). 104 nautical miles at an angle of 13 degrees(SPERULATIS) one will find the Island of Avalon where Joseph of Arimathea is buried. This Island presently known as Burgh Island in Devon was named by Melkin as Avalon and depicted in the Perlesvaus as a tidal Island next to a valley. The confirmation that we have located the resting place of Joseph of Arimathea is found in evidence given by Father William Good who says that 'Joseph is carefully hidden in Montacute'. As one can see, the line Melkin has indicated through his geometrical instructions, (once decoded), goes right through St. Michaels hill Montacute and leads to the Island of Avalon
The Saint Michael Ley line
A line of neolithic earthworks which has been built upon with a line of churches dedicated to the Archangel Michael. This Michael line in the south of England integrates with other Michaeline churches and chapels which act as 'marker' churches as part of a design that was instigated to locate the Island of Avalon
St. Michael line- Brent Tor
Brent tor is a St. Michael dedicated church high up on a prominent natural mound not far from the rumb line of churches that make up the Saint Michael line
Glastonbury tor
St. Michael's tower Glastonbury built with other churches that make up the St. Michael Ley line.
9/11



St. Michael Line -Burrow Mump
A St. Michael dedicated Church alignened with other churches and chapels along the St. Michael ley line.
St Michael's Roche Rock
Although not on the St. Michael ley line it is similar to other St. Michael prominent sites.
St. Michael site Carn Brea Redruth
The ite where a Saint Michael Chapel once stood on top of Carn Brea Redruth. This position is precisely upon the St. Michael line of churches running from Chapel Carn Brea through to Avebury.
Burgh Island- Avalon
The Huers Hut on top of Burgh Island where also Camden bears witness that there was a St. Michael chapel. These Saint. Michael dedicated chapels on Burgh Island and that which was upon Montacute, integrate with the geometry found in Melkin's Prophecy. The two chapels on the Joseph line have disappeared without trace.
10/11



Saint Michael's hill Montacute
The hill upon which was another church dedicated to St. Michael. This is the hill where Joseph of Arimathea was said to be 'carefully hidden'. The hill integrates with the St. Michael line of churches and acts as a marker point in Melkin's geometric puzzle that Locates the genuine island of Avalon. Chapel Carn Brea
Another hill top site at the end of the St.Michael line in England which used to have a chapel dedicated to St. Michael built upon it. All that is left on the hill top are the remains of the old tomb.
The St. Michael line at Redruth
The saint Michal line runs through the site of an old St.Michael chapel on top of Carn Brea near Redruth
Saint michael's rock to Harnhill St. Michael.
The line running through Glastonbury tor from where the Chapel of St. Michael stood on Burgh Island up to Harnhill St. Michael's church.
11/11